Many people feel that they have missed the opportunity to buy cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin – but this is certainly not the case. Crypto is still in its infancy, being only 11 years old this year. Compare that to the internet, which has been in existence for 30+ years. You are still an early adopter of the most disruptive technology since the founding of the internet.
Buy R100 worth of Bitcoin using promo code: BLACKFRIDAY and receive an additional R100 worth of Bitcoin for FREE. T&Cs apply.  
A staggering stat: according to Google Trends, “Bitcoin is more popular in Africa than anywhere else in the world.”*
Are you ready? You’ve seen the light. It’s time to take that leap into the future of money and dip your toes in crypto. Before you do, though, there are a few important things to remember…
.
First and foremost – do your research. There is a wealth of information out there about cryptocurrencies, so it can be hard to know who to trust. Before you sign up to a cryptocurrency exchange and make your first buy, be sure to ask these three questions:

Do they have a proven track record? 
Do they offer strong security features?
Do world-class, respected investors back the company? 

If the answers to any of these questions aren’t available to you, search for a company that is more transparent. 
Open a FREE Bitcoin Wallet Now.
A trusted platform: Luno is the first cryptocurrency platform in Africa with more than 3 million customers.
Secure customer funds: Luno stores cryptocurrency using multi-signature security with independent 3rd party security partners, making it impossible for a single individual to get access to those funds.
Recognised investors: Luno is backed by some of the world’s biggest and most influential companies, including Naspers, Rand Merchant Investment Holdings and Balderton Capital.
.
View the live Bitcoin to Rand Price Here
SA Shares recently partnered with Luno to give all of their clients the opportunity to invest in Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash or Ethereum directly from their stock platform.

Buy R100 worth of Bitcoin using promo code: BLACKFRIDAY and receive an additional R100 worth of Bitcoin for FREE. T&Cs apply.  
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.