RUGBY
Heyneke booted out in Paris
Former Springbok coach Heyneke Meyer has resigned from his position in charge of the French Top 14’s bottom side Stade Francais, the club announced.
Meyer, who led the Springboks at the 2015 Rugby World Cup, quit Stade after losing seven from the opening nine matches of the season with local reports saying he had been sacked after less than two years with the Parisian outfit.
“It has been an honour to coach the club. I have had a great life experience coaching Stade Francais and I have loved my time in Paris,” Meyer, 52, said in statement.
“It has always been my intention to do what is best for this great club,” he added.
Meyer’s assistants in ex-France prop Pieter de Villiers, South Africans Dewald Senekal Ricardo Loubscher and English defence coach John McFarland are also expected to leave. – AFP.
=============
TENNIS
Raven’s run continues
South African tennis star Raven Klaasen and his New Zealand doubles partner Michael Venus have qualified for the last-four of the ATP Finals in London.
The fifth-seeded pairing beat second seeds Lukasz Kubot (Poland) and Marcelo Melo (Brazil) 6-3, 6-4 on Tuesday night to claim their second win of the event.
In their first match on Sunday, the SA-Kiwi duo beat fourth seeds Rajeev Ram (America) and Joe Salisbury (Great Britain), also with a 6-3, 6-4 scoreline.
Klaasen and Venus will face eighth seeds Ivan Dodig (Croatia) and Filip Polasek (Slovakia) in their final round-robin game on Thursday but are already assured of a spot in the weekend’s semi-finals.
“Everything seems to be going great this week. We just keep trying to work hard and persevere together,” Venus told the ATP Tour’s official website .
“We’re just happy to be playing this well at the end of the year and especially in London. It’s such a special event… The atmosphere makes it awesome to play out here.”
Klaasen added: “We’re really excited about how we played. Mikey carried me out there today. We’re just happy to be through.” – News24 Wire.
=============
Thiem impresses as Federer-Djokovic showdown looms
This multi-exposure shows Austria’s Dominic Thiem as he serves against Serbia’s Novak Djokovic during their men’s singles round-robin match on day three of the ATP World Tour Finals tennis tournament at the O2 Arena in London on November 12, 2019. – Austria’s Dominic Thiem beat Serbia’s Novak Djokovic 6-7; 6-3; 7-6. (Photo by Glyn KIRK / AFP)
Dominic Thiem produced a scintillating display of attacking tennis to beat Novak Djokovic and qualify for the last four at the ATP Finals on Tuesday, leaving the Serbian facing a shootout against Roger Federer.
In the standout match so far at London’s O2 Arena, the Austrian fifth seed took the fight to the world number two, recovering from losing the first set to triumph 6-7 (5/7), 6-3, 7-6 (7/5)
Earlier, Federer put himself back in the mix at the end-of-season event with a 7-6 (7/2), 6-3 win against Italian debutant Matteo Berrettini in their round-robin clash.
Federer and Djokovic will face off on Thursday in a repeat of this year’s Wimbledon final to determine who else will progress from Group Bjorn Borg.
“This was really one of these special matches, what I’ve practised all my life for, all my childhood for,” Thiem said.
“Really epic one in an amazing atmosphere, beating a legend of our game. And also I’ve qualified for the semi-finals, which is the best.” – AFP.
CRICKET
Rookie batters impress for England
Zak Crawley of England bats during the tour match between New Zealand XI and England at Cobham Oval on November 12, 2019 in Whangarei, New Zealand. (Photo by Gareth Copley/Getty Images)
Dom Sibley and Zac Crawley staked their claims for England Test debuts with unbeaten centuries in their first warm-up match in New Zealand, which ended in a draw in Whangarei on Wednesday.
Stuart Broad was also in sharp form with a miserly one for 15 off nine overs against a New Zealand XI made up of fringe first class players.
Given a chance to acclimatise to New Zealand conditions, Sibley made a disciplined 100 and Crawley 103 before both retired, while Joe Root hit an unbeaten 41 at a run-a-ball pace.
In reply to England’s two for 376 declared, the New Zealand XI were four for 285 at the close of the two-day match.
In contrast to Broad’s tight performance with the ball, Jofra Archer took two for 46 off 11 overs while Ben Stokes finished with none for 33 off eight.
A three-day match against New Zealand A starts in Whangarei on Friday with the first Test beginning in Tauranga on November 21. – AFP.
=============
Katy Perry fireworks for World T20
American popstar Katy Perry announced Wednesday she will be performing at the final of the Women’s Twenty20 World Cup in Melbourne next March before an expected record crowd on International Women’s Day.
“Aussie Aussie Aussie Oi Oi Oi!” Perry said in an Instagram post using the Australian sporting chant.
“Let’s break some records – join me in Melbourne on March 8, 2020 for the ICC @T20WorldCup Women’s Final. We’ll Roar in support of these awesome women on International Women’s Day!”
The International Cricket Council said Perry would perform both before and after the final in “what is anticipated to be the biggest women’s cricket match of all time.”
It said it was an opportunity to set a new world attendance record at a women’s sporting fixture.
The current record crowd of 90,185 was set at the 1999 FIFA Women’s World Cup final in Pasadena, California. – AFP.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.