Airports Company South Africa (Acsa) and BMW South Africa launched BMW ChargeNow electric vehicle (EV) charging stations at OR Tambo International Airport, Cape Town International Airport and King Shaka International Airport on November 1.
Electric vehicles using the BMW ChargeNow stations at the three airports will also enjoy exclusive parking bays, reports Kempton Express.
OR Tambo International Airport and Cape Town International Airport each have two stations which can accommodate up to four cars at a time, while King Shaka International Airport has one which can charge two cars at a time.
ALSO READ: Toyota, Panasonic announce electric car battery tie-up
To welcome the collaboration with BMW South Africa, Acsa will cover all charging station-related electricity costs for 12 months. Furthermore, BMW EV drivers will enjoy free parking at the three airports during November for a maximum of four days at a time.
This makes it possible for other EV users to park and fly as well.
An EVs using the BMW ChargeNow station at the exclusive parking bay at OR Tambo International Airport.
Speaking at the launch at OR Tambo International Airport, Acsa acting chief executive officer Fundi Sithebe said the specified airports continued to break new ground in terms of innovation and the introduction of infrastructure that sought to enhance the passenger experience.

“We are delighted to launch the first electric vehicle charging stations at African airports. These charging bays will reduce the number one concern most electric vehicle drivers have, which is range anxiety.
“From today, BMW EV users may drive to and from our three airports with comfort because while they travel, we will be charging their vehicles,” said Sithebe.
“We are grateful to our partner, BMW South Africa, for its partnership in this initiative. With both the vehicle and air transport sectors endeavouring to reduce their environmental impacts, services such as this will play an increasing role in coming years,” said Sithebe.
BMW Group South Africa and sub-Saharan Africa chief executive officer Tim Abbott said the new ChargeNow stations in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban were physical manifestations of the seismic change the industry was going through.
“I’d like to thank Acsa for its vision. As the move to EVs gathers pace, I imagine we’ll see more of these partnerships. We’ve been rolling out charging infrastructure across the country since we launched the BMW i3 and BMW i8 in 2015, and these charging points take our tally of BMW ChargeNow charging points to more than 60,” said Abbott.

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.