Faf de Klerk wouldn’t boast such flowing golden locks had it not been for the “immense” effort he puts into manicuring it.
In fact, the Springbok scrumhalf – who’s become somewhat of a cult hero following South Africa’s World Cup success – shampoos his hair no less than three times a day!
At least that’s according to his South African roommate at English club Sale, Jono Ross.
Jono Ross of Sale Sharks during the Premiership Rugby Cup Fourth Round match between London Irish and Sale Sharks at the Madejski Stadium on October 12, 2019 in Reading, England. (Photo by Harry Trump/Getty Images)
In a candid interview with RugbyPass, the former Bulls captain lays out the full extent of De Klerk’s grooming routine.
“He is washing his hair and conditioning it three times a day with highlights and what not. He takes a lot of care. A lot of shampoo, a lot of conditioner in the dressing room. Blow drying, in the mirror, always busy with his hair,” the 29-year-old flanker, who played Super Rugby for two seasons before departing for France in mid-2014, told the specialist website.
“I said this to someone the other day, he has probably got more hair products than my wife does.”
De Klerk reinforced the perception of him being one of the Boks’ proverbial rockstars by meeting Prince Harry in his underwear during the team’s post-final celebrations.
ALSO READ: WATCH: Faf meets Prince Harry in underwear, Frans Steyn challenges him to a beer!
Yet Ross mentions that the diminutive, terrier of a halfback is actually very humble.
“To be fair to him, he might have those sort of flash things but he is a real down to earth guy. He is a hard-working, hard as nails person and I have a lot of time for him,” he said. 
“We spend a lot of time together and he is a great, great person before the rugby and all of that. He has had a tough career. Things haven’t just been handed to him, he has had to work really hard to get to where he is. He deserves credit and I have a lot of respect for him.”
  For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.