While most people in the country had their eyes glued to their television sets on Saturday morning, delighting in the clinical way the Springboks demolished their English counterparts, I had one eye on my phone. You see, I became a grandfather. My daughter in Bloemfontein adopted the most gorgeously beautiful kitten and I have been getting hourly updates of the new baby’s every meow, meal and surprise attack. Abandoned by her mother and rescued from a certain death in the stormwater drains of Bloemfontein, little Leja is now being treated like the goddess ancient Egyptians believed cats to be. She...While most people in the country had their eyes glued to their television sets on Saturday morning, delighting in the clinical way the Springboks demolished their English counterparts, I had one eye on my phone.
You see, I became a grandfather. My daughter in Bloemfontein adopted the most gorgeously beautiful kitten and I have been getting hourly updates of the new baby’s every meow, meal and surprise attack.
Abandoned by her mother and rescued from a certain death in the stormwater drains of Bloemfontein, little Leja is now being treated like the goddess ancient Egyptians believed cats to be.
She already has an extensive selection of toys, and judging from the videos, her catnip-stuffed mouse is her favourite. She also has her own cupboard where a selection of eats and treats are stored.
Of course, within hours of moving into her new castle, she knew exactly where the yummies are stored, and how to manipulate her new mommy to spoil her rotten.
One of her favourite games is to stalk the little toy mouse, pounce on it, and hurl it skyward with the flick of a nail. She’s also an avid ball chaser and that has led me to scour the internet in search of a little catnip-stuffed rugby ball – something which apparently is yet to be invented.
But of all the things she does, I am most fascinated by her love for a hot shower.
The moment my daughter has the water just right, little Leja jumps in. She gets soaked while rolling around, attacking the drops as they perform an aerial assault.
And when it’s time for bed, she obviously takes the lion’s share of the bed she shares with her mom. That is her new reality, and all of us will ensure it lasts a lifetime.
In the weeks to come, when the euphoria of Saturday’s rugby miracle wears off, many South Africans will still face the reality of a bucket with cold water for their daily wash and a shortage of food.
We may have won the World Cup, but how many little Lejas’ lives have really changed?
Danie Toerien.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.