Great spectacle, brilliant racing and a large crowd typified the final round of this year’s Extreme Festival series at the Zwartkops Raceway near Pretoria this past Saturday.
Heading up proceedings were two races for G&H Transport Extreme Supercars, with 28 entries coming under starter’s orders. The opening race went to Franco Scribante (Porsche 911 Turbo), followed by Charl Arangies (Stradale McLaren MP4-12C), Pieter Zeelie (Toyota MR2 Supra Turbo), Elwyn Steenkamp (Jeys BMW E46 M3), Lee Thompson (Porsche 911 GT3 Cup) and Greg Parton (Drizit Lamborghini Huracan). Scribante also managed to set the quickest lap time of the meeting at 59.88 sec. Scribante, Arangies and Zeelie took the top podium places in race two as well, followed by Thompson, Steenkamp and Jonathan du Toit (TAR Ferrari F430).
Wynand van der Merwe (Sandton Dental Porsche 911 GT3) won Class B first time around, followed by Nicky Dicks (Curvent Porsche 911) and Johan de Bruyn (Odorcure Porsche 911 GT3). Race two went to Rick Loureiro (Combined BMW 335i), ahead of Van der Merwe and De Bruyn.
Franco di Matteo (Deltec Batteries Jaguar) took the opening Mobil 1 V8 Supercar race from Thomas Reib (Mobil 1 Chevrolet Lumina) and Terry Wilford (Fuchs Ford Falcon). Di Matteo won race two as well, this time ahead of JP Nortje (N4 Autocraft Corvette) and Mackie Adlem (Adlem Auto Jaguar).
TITLE WINNER. Stiaan Kriel (Creative Ink Polo) won both the MotorMart VW Challenge races to clinch the year’s overall championship title. Picture: RacePics.
Both the MotorMart VW Challenge races went to Lyle Ramsay (Monroe Polo), beating Bevin Masters (CPS Warehouse Polo) and Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo) to the flag. On both occasions tin-top specialist Stiaan Kriel took Class B with his Creative Ink Polo, to clinch the year’s overall title.
Brett Garland (AutObarn Honda Civic) won the first Car Care Clinic SuperHatch race, narrowly ahead of Jonathan du Toit (TAR Honda Civic) and Louis Scholtz (Car Care Clinic Honda Civic). A hard charging Du Toit won the next time around, followed by Garland. Meanwhile woman racer Mel Spurr drove brilliantly to clinch the final overall podium place in her Class B Itre Cugini VW Polo.
Wouter Roos (Nathans VW Golf GTi) won both the Car Care Clinic 111 Sports and Saloon Car races, followed over the line by George Economides (Wealth Ave BMW 328i). Kalyn Miller (Midas Kia Pride) and Harry Arangies (Stradale Nissan 350Z) shared the respective third places.
Jaco Schriks (Lube Station Rhema) took the opening Hankook Formula Vee race from Gert van den Berg (Hankook Rhema) and Peter Hills (Lube Fusion Rhema). Schriks took race two as well, winning the year’s Hankook Formula Vee title in the process. He was chased to the end by Van den Berg and Luchen Ramchander (Liqui Moly Forza).
Both Bridgestone Superbike Challenge races went to Hendrik de Bruin (Yamaha YZF), leading home Hein McMahon (BDJ Freight BMW S1000RR) and Harry Timmermann (APCC BMW HP4). The next event at the Zwartkops Raceway will be the 19th international Passion for Speed on January 31 and February 1, 2020.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.