GOLF
Koepka out of Presidents Cup with knee injury
Brooks Koepka announced Wednesday he is withdrawing from the Presidents Cup with a knee injury, with US captain Tiger Woods promptly selecting Rickie Fowler for the vacant spot.
“Today, I am announcing my withdrawal from the US Presidents Cup Team because of my knee injury,” Koepka said in a statement that was posted on the US PGA Tour website.
“I notified Captain Tiger Woods that despite constant medical care and rehab, I am not able to play golf at this time. I consider it to be a high honor to be part of the 2019 team and I regret not being able to compete.”
World number one Koepka, who had stem cell treatment on his left knee after the Tour Championship, pulled out of the CJ Cup in South Korea after aggravating the injury when he slipped on a cart path.
He said he had been in constant contact with Woods since then, but now realized he needed “more time to heal.” – AFP.
=============
NETBALL
SA legend Burger retires
Jamie-Lee Price of GWS (R) and Erin Burger of the Firebirds in action during the round 11 Super Netball match between the Giants and Firebirds at AIS on August 04, 2019 in Canberra, Australia. (Photo by Tracey Nearmy/Getty Images)
After an illustrious career that has run for 12 years as a Proteas player, centre Erin Burger has decided to hang up her boots and called it quits on her international netball career.
The lanky centre has represented and played for South Africa 120 times and was the first South African to clock 100 caps for the Proteas.
Burger made her debut for South Africa back in January 2007 as a 19-year-old against the Roses in Birmingham and has played under five coaches during her tenure as a player.
“Being able to represent and serve my country as a netball player must be one of the best things that I could have ever asked for,” said Burger in a press release.
“It has been an absolute honour for me to play the game. I have learnt a lot and grown so much as a person and as a player. My biggest gratitude to Netball South Africa and the entire leadership. Thank you for all that you’ve done and continue to do to grow the game. You’ve given a young girl like me an opportunity to live her dream.”
Burger is currently the most capped Proteas player with 120 appearances for the national team and played her last international match against the Roses in Liverpool which is the same team she played her first game against back in 2007. – News24 Wire
=============
GOLF
Hong Kong Open postponed as protests grip city
Next week’s Hong Kong Open, one of the biggest golf tournaments in Asia, was postponed on Wednesday following months of anti-government protests in the city.
“Regretfully the European Tour, in conjunction with our tournament co-sanctioning partner at the Asian Tour, has taken the decision to postpone next week’s Hong Kong Open,” a European Tour statement said.
European Tour chief executive Keith Pelley said he hoped the event, whose winners include Rory McIlroy, Colin Montgomerie and Peter Thomson, could be rescheduled for early next year.
“The decision has been taken due to the ongoing level of social unrest in Hong Kong,” Pelley said.
“As the safety of our players, staff, stakeholders and everyone involved in each and every one of our tournaments around the world is our top priority, we feel this is the correct, but unfortunate, course of action.” – AFP.
=============
RUGBY
Historic Georgia meeting for Springboks in 2020
SA Rugby confirmed on Wednesday that the Springboks will face Scotland and Georgia in three home Tests in the new international window of July 2020, as part of the Castle Lager Incoming Series match schedule.
The newly-crowned Rugby World Cup champions are scheduled to play two Tests against Scotland, on 4 and 11 July, before hosting Georgia in a historical first home Test, on Saturday, 18 July.
It will be the Scots’ first visit to South Africa since June 2014, when the Boks beat them by 55-6 in Port Elizabeth. The Springboks and Georgia have only met once before, in a pool match at the Rugby World Cup in 2003 in Sydney, when SA won 46-19.
SA Rugby will confirm the venues and kick-off times of the three matches at a later stage. – Own Correspondent
=============
More honours for Pieter-Steph
The third annual star-studded  BrightRock Players Choice Awards  was held at the The Park at Hyde Park in Johannesburg on Tuesday with Pieter-Steph du Toit taking home the coveted Players’ Player of the Year award as well as two others.
Du Toit followed in the footsteps of Springbok captain, Siya Kolisi, who won the prestigious award in 2017 and hooker, Malcolm Marx, the winner in 2018.
The winners were decided by South Africa’s professional rugby players in a voting process which was run by MyPlayers, the South African rugby players’ organisation.
Over and above the Players’ Player of the Year award, Du Toit won the Defender of the Year and Forward of the Year.
Other winners on the night included Herschel Jantjies (Best of the Bench and #LoveChange Award), Cheslin Kolbe (Backline Player of the Year) and Rosko Specman (Fan’s Choice Award). – News24 Wire
=============
CRICKET
India finally joins pink party
In this picture taken on November 13, 2019, India’s cricket team captain Virat Kohli throws a pink cricket ball during a training session at Holkar Cricket Stadium in Indore. – India will become the last major cricketing nation to enter the pink-ball Test era on November 22, 2019 after long resisting innovations to the five-day format. The second Test against Bangladesh in Kolkata will be a day-night affair — partly played under floodlights, and with a pink ball rather than red for better visibility. (Photo by Indranil MUKHERJEE / AFP) / IMAGE RESTRICTED TO EDITORIAL USE – STRICTLY NO COMMERCIAL USETO GO WITH ‘Cricket-IND-BAN-pink’ FOCUS by Faisal KAMAL
India will become the last major cricketing nation to enter the pink-ball Test era Friday after long resisting innovations to the five-day format.
The second Test against Bangladesh in Kolkata will be a day-night affair — partly played under floodlights, and with a pink ball rather than red for better visibility.
Day-night Tests, aimed at increasing crowds and TV audiences for the five-day games, were successfully introduced in 2015 but India has balked at joining the party.
Despite the delayed introduction, former India captain Sunil Gavaskar told AFP that the future is bright for pink-ball games.
“When day-night cricket started not many thought it would be successful but look at the huge following it has now, so there’s no reason to believe that day night Test cricket won’t be successful too,” said Gavaskar. – AFP.
‘Mac’ to the Stars’ rescue?
Former Proteas and Lions batsman Neil McKenzie has joined the Jozi Stars backroom team in a mentorship and consultancy role for the duration of the Mzansi Super League (MSL) campaign.
McKenzie  brings with him a wealth of experience to the Jozi Stars team, having scored a career total of just under 36 000 runs. He has represented the Lions and Proteas in Test, ODI and T20 formats as well as spells in England for Durham, Somerset and Hampshire.
The Lions legend was most recently with the Bangladesh national team where he was the batting coach to the Tigers side for their 2019 ICC Cricket World Cup campaign.
The Stars, defending champions, are rooted to the bottom of the table in 2019, with four consecutive losses from four games. – Sport Staff.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.