Joseph saddled four, Aidan ran three but it was namesake Danny O’Brien who regained the winning thread for Australia with his sole runner Vow And Declare narrowly prevailing by a head in a thrilling Lexus Melbourne Cup over 3200m under jockey Craig Williams at Fleming- ton Racecourse yesterday.
The drama continued in the aftermath of Australia’s most prestigious race with Prince Of Arran promoted to second from third after stewards objected to interference caused by the Frankie De orridden Master Of Reality, who was demoted to fourth from the runner-up spot.
Racing Victoria stewards deemed Master Of Reality to have interfered with Il Paradiso, who passed the post in fourth but was promoted to third. Vow And Declare, however, was never in any danger in the post-race objection after staying on the rail up the home straight having broken from stall 21.
O’Brien trains at Flemington and the Australian-bred four-year-old has never raced out of his native country, so it was a result to savour for the locals after back-to-back one-two-threes going to Ireland then Britain.
A composed O’Brien said: “I felt he was going to finish third or fourth, which would ultimately have been a bit disappointing as we were so close to winning, but he just keeps surging for you, and that’s exactly what he did. “He’s a very young horse and he’ll get better with age.
I expect we’ll try to get back to this race next year.” O’Brien was embroiled in a controversial cobalt case that came to a close last year.
The multiple Group 1-winning trainer was initially banned for four years by racing authorities for the administration of the element to horses in his care, but the disqualification was subsequently overturned by the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, and O’Brien fined A$8,000.
He said: “I was very confident that once we got outside the racing jurisdiction we would be found innocent. We never had any nefarious intent with anything we did.”
It was not just the trainer who maintained his innocence, with Vow And Declare’s part-owner Geoff Corrigan sticking by O’Brien throughout. Close to two years on, they are now dreaming of a trip to Royal Ascot. Eight years ago, Williams landed the Caulfield Cup and Cox Plate and was booked to ride Dunaden in the race that stops the nation.
A suspension for his ride in the Bendigo Cup took away that opportunity and Dunaden stole the show under Christophe Lemaire.
Williams said: “I want to savour this moment – it means so much. Not only is this our greatest race but, as you can see by the form book, it is targeted by horses from all around the world – and we did it with an Australian horse.
“We had a difficult draw but he’s a great horse.” Australia’s two leading hopes failed to threaten with Finche staying on at the same pace for seventh, and Constantinople never nearer in 13th.
A tardy start cost Constantinople according to David Hayes, who echoed Waller’s thoughts on the positive result for the home challenge.
Hayes, saddling his last runners in the race before returning to train in Hong Kong, said: “Constantinople missed the start and was always awkwardly placed. He was bumped a little and overraced – he’s lightly raced and his inexperience told.
There was an unfortunate postscript for one of Hayes’s runners with Rostropovich, who trailed in last, sustaining a stress fracture to his pelvis. The former Aidan O’Brien-trained four-year-old is in a stable condition at the Werribee equine centre.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.