Tough and varied conditions tested crews and vehicles to the full at the Parys 400, the final round of this year’s South African Cross Country Series in the Free State over the weekend. Wet and muddy conditions on Friday, followed by searing heat on Saturday ended the season on a challenging note. In the process unexpected winners appeared, and the year’s final outstanding title chase was settled.
CLASS WIN. Brazilian pairing Marcos Baumgart/Kleber Cincea (Ford Castrol Cross Country Ranger) took the Class T victory. Picture: Colin Mileman
By winning the race, Henk Lategan and Brett Cummings (Toyota Gazoo Hilux) became the overall 2019 Production Vehicle champions. They finished comfortably ahead of Chris Visser/Danie Stassen (Atlas Copco Toyota Hilux), with Shameer Variawa/ Juan Möhr (Toyota Gazoo Hilux), Brazilians Marcos Baumgart/ Kleber Cincea (Ford Castrol Cross Country Ranger), and Lance Woolridge/ Ward Huxtable (Ford Castrol Cross Country Ranger) rounding out the top five places.
The drive of the weekend arguably came from Giniel de Villiers / Alex Haro (Toyota Gazoo Hilux), who started 32nd and stone last on Saturday morning, after breaking a propshaft and retiring from Friday’s qualifying race. They blasted through the field, ending the first loop 13th, and finally finishing sixth in the Production Vehicle category. Johan Horn/ Leander Pienaar (Malalane Toyota Hilux), Jacques van Tonder/ Nico Swartz (Ford Ranger), Clint Weston/ Gerhard Snyman (King Price Extreme) and Richard Leeke/ Zaheer Bodhanya (Ford Ranger) rounded out the top ten places.
MAIDEN WIN. Ralph and André Voigt (Voigt Group BAT) took their first Special Vehicle category victory of the season. Picture: Dave Ledbitter
The Voigt brothers, Ralph and  André (Voigt Group BAT) took their first victory this season in the Special Vehicle category, five minutes and 45 seconds clear of second placed John Thomson/ Maurice Zermatten (Mormond Zarco). Brothers, Taahir and Talha Moosajee (Dunlop Zone Stryker) rounded out the podium places, leading home Trace Price Moor/ Shaun Braithwaite (BAT). Sandra Labuscagne-Jonck and husband, Jaco Jonck (Total Agri Porter), the Makenete brothers, Keith and Andrew (BAT) and Julio Ferreira/ Mohammed Moulson (Aceco).
After two runner-up results, it was a first victory for Dewald van Breda/ Johann du Toit (Can-Am Maverick) in the Side by Side National Championship category. They were followed by Peter Walter/ Shaun de Villiers (CanAm Maverick), Christo Rose/ Dirk Swart (Can-Am Maverick), Theo Erasmus/ Edward Odendaal (Can-Am Maverick), Wickus Haasbroek/ Jurgens Smith (CanAm Maverick) and Werner/ Leon Mostert (Elf Can-Am Maverick).
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.