The Hyundai Atos is back in South Africa with a new, modern look and styling, a long list of standard features and a solid road performance that promises to make this entry-level model in the Korean manufacturer’s local range a top-seller.
The Atos will only be available in one model, the 1.1 Motion, and priced at R159 900 finds itself in a bracket which include the Suzuki Celerio 1.0 GL, the Datsun Go 1.2 Mid and the Renault Kwid 1.0 Climber, all priced within R2 500 of one another. The Swift range starts at R3 000 higher, while the most affordable Kia Picanto is R3 005 more than the Atos. The Atos’ slightly bigger sibling, the Grand i10, starts at R171 900. Hyundai also offers the standard seven-year/200 000km warranty.
Built on an all-new platform with bigger dimensions than its predecessor, a spacious cabin and sporting superior ride and handling with low NVH (noise, vibration and harshness) levels, the new Atos has the credentials to be at the top of the shopping list of buyers in the entry-level car segment. It is also equipped with a frugal free-revving four-cylinder engine that delivers excellent fuel consumption.

“Our previous model has sold 45 092 units in South Africa and – together with the Tucson and Getz – helped to cement the Hyundai brand as a trustworthy one that delivers quality cars with a long road life,” says Stanley Anderson, Sales and Operations Director at Hyundai Automotive South Africa.
“After thorough local testing, we decided the new Atos has what it takes to compete successfully yet again in the tough entry-level car market in South Africa. We expect this section of the local car market to grow substantially as a consequence of the tough financial situations of many consumers. When we could finally pin a price of R159 900 to the new Atos, we were convinced we have a winner in this stylish little car,” says Anderson.
The local re-entry of Atos followed road tests over a 1 100km route that ranged from sea-level to the high altitude of the Highveld – all done in on-the-road comparison with some of the new model’s main rivals. The 50 kW maximum power that the Atos’ 1 086 cc engine delivers at 5 500 rpm, plus the maximum torque of 99 Nm which comes at 2 800 rpm, compares favourably with a range of competitors. Official fuel consumption, tested in a real-world combined cycle, is 5.7 litres per 100 km.

Its dimensions and ground clearance are also on par with its rivals, but it is the whole package, with a complete list of features that the Atos offers at a most competitive price, which will perk the interest of new car buyers. The Atos’ modern stylish “tall boy design” is another aspect of the car that attracts attention. The cabin allows a lot of head space and leg room, with good visibility and ergonomics.
The list of standard features includes an infotainment system with a seven-inch touchscreen plus Apple CarPlay and Bluetooth connectivity, an on-board computer; a multi-function steering wheel with remote buttons for the radio, sound system and Bluetooth-connected smartphone, a USB charging socket, as well as an extra 12V power socket, air conditioner, electric front windows and comfortable seats with durable cover materials. On the safety front, the Atos features airbags for the driver and front passenger, ABS, and ISOFIX child seat attachment points on the rear seat bench.
The Atos is offered in colours ranging from the eye-catching and sprightly Acid Yellow to Polar White, Titan Grey, Fiery Red, Alpha Blue and Typhoon Silver.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.