Cut KG Rabada and co a bit of slack.
Former Proteas quick Morne Morkel leapt to the defence of the national team’s embattled pace attack following their poor showing in the Test series whitewash against India, insisting some perspective is required.
Despite the spinner generally holding sway yet again, there was much admiration for the Indian seamers, Mohammad Shami and Umesh Yadav, who shared 24 wickets between them, suggesting South Africa utilised the friendlier conditions rather badly.
The Proteas’ fast bowlers only managed 10 wickets and 25 overall in four innings.
“I don’t think you can truly judge a pace attack in the sub-continent,” said Morkel, who’s making a homecoming of sorts by turning out for the Tshwane Spartans in this season’s Mzansi Super League.
Morne Morkel during the Tshwane Spartans open day at SuperSport Park on November 05, 2019 in Pretoria, South Africa. (Photo by Christiaan Kotze/Gallo Images)
“Once they guys are back here in home conditions, extra pace and extra bounce, KG, Lungi (Ngidi) and (Anrich) Nortje will come to the party. India was always going to be a tough tour, no matter who was playing. Even if there were more experienced guys playing it would’ve been difficult.”
The 34-year-old, who retired from international cricket last year and has become intimately familiar with English domestic cricket as Kolpak player for Surrey, though cautions that England, who start their tour of South Africa next month, will be a “different kettle of fish”.
“The way I see how they go about their game, they place a premium on maintaining a high standard,” he said.
“South Africa are still finding their feet and testing a few combinations. We need to understand that there’s a lot of inexperience around now. Anrich’s got all the pace, but it’s going to take time for him to find his feet.
“It’s important to get the right guys in to explain that to the guys. That’s international cricket, there’s simply no place to hide. England are a solid team, but I’ve got full confidence that if we just start performing again and find a style of play, we could easily compete.”
There’s an extra incentive for Rabada and his teammates to find their range given that Morkel believes England might have a vulnerable top order, even though he hailed the impact of Surrey teammate Rory Burns.
England batsman Rory Burns picks up some runs during day three of the 4th Ashes Test Match between England and Australia at Old Trafford on September 06, 2019 in Manchester, England. (Photo by Stu Forster/Getty Images)
“For sure there are a few chinks. I play with (national opener) Rory and before the Ashes I was a bit nervous for him. But he’s the one guy that day-in and day-out spends endless hours in the nets and working on his game. He’s worked out a plan that works for him,” he said.
“Yes, he’ll be tested on our faster tracks, but he’s found a way to score runs. Other interesting options are Dom Sibley and Zak Crawley. The No 3 and 4 positions might be exploitable, but there are a lot of options too. I won’t be surprised if Olly Pope (another Surrey teammate) is used there. He’s a quality, quality player. If Joe Root bats three, Olly can do four. I’d give him a run.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.