Lions head coach Ivan ‘Cash’ van Rooyen has a mountain to climb in the 2020 Super Rugby season, but being married into the family of famous Springbok brothers Darius and Naas Botha has given him a glimpse of what it’s going to take. Van Rooyen’s wife, Rienie, is the daughter of Darius – a former Bok and Northern Transvaal wing who died from stomach cancer in February 2018 – and a niece to Naas. Both Darius and his more famous younger brother, former Bok captain and flyhalf Naas, formed part of a memorable Northerns side which competed between 1977 and...Lions head coach Ivan ‘Cash’ van Rooyen has a mountain to climb in the 2020 Super Rugby season, but being married into the family of famous Springbok brothers Darius and Naas Botha has given him a glimpse of what it’s going to take.
Van Rooyen’s wife, Rienie, is the daughter of Darius – a former Bok and Northern Transvaal wing who died from stomach cancer in February 2018 – and a niece to Naas.
Both Darius and his more famous younger brother, former Bok captain and flyhalf Naas, formed part of a memorable Northerns side which competed between 1977 and 1981, winning the Currie Cup four times and sharing it once.
ALSO READ: It’s official (sort of): ‘Doctor’ Jannie and Carlu Sadie are at the Lions
“There were very happy family times with them with a lot of laughter and joy being shared,” Van Rooyen said, remembering discussions between his late father-in-law and his world renowned brother.
Naas Botha (L) with Darius Botha in Johannesburg, South Africa (Photo by Wessel Oosthuizen/Gallo Images)
“I remember being so intrigued when they started telling tales of former tours.”
For now, however, Van Rooyen said his focus was on next year’s Super Rugby campaign, as he geared up for his first full season in charge after briefly taking control of the team on tour in New Zealand this year when former coach Swys de Bruin took ill and had to return home.
“Our pre-season is in full swing and after enjoying some time off last week we are starting with what we call phase three of our 0pre-season programme,” he said.
“At this stage most of the focus has been on the players’ conditioning and fitness levels, as well as gymnasium work, while all the
players have gone through their routine medical check-ups.”
The Lions confirmed they had signed contracts with former Bok prop Jannie du Plessis and Western Province youngster Carlu
Sadie.
Van Rooyen also said other acquisitions including Bulls scrumhalf Andre Warner and flank Roelof Smit, as well as former Province centre Dan Kriel, had settled in well at the Lions, continuing the tradition of the franchise adopting a family-type culture … much like those chats with Bothas.
From left to right, the new Lions recruits: Francke Horn, Andre Warner, Roelof Smit, Tiaan Swanepoel, James Mollentze & Dan Kriel. Photo: Lions Rugby Co/Facebook
“I must compliment them with their great enthusiasm and positive attitude, and they have been heartily welcomed by the rest of the squad,” Van Rooyen said.
“At this stage we are still working with a big squad and they probably have to get used to our routines and structures, which
are probably a bit different to where they come from, but they are settling in very nicely.”
The Lions are scheduled to open their Super Rugby campaign on February 1 with an away game against the Jaguares in Buenos Aires.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.