The Democratic Alliance (DA) showed their hand yesterday when, as expected, they elected John Steenhuisen the party’s interim leader, and Ivan Meyer the interim federal chairperson. Steenhuisen beat out the Gauteng provincial legislature’s Makashule Gana to the party’s top job after 160 DA members voted for him. Both Steenhuisen and Meyer will hold these positions until the party’s early congress next year. The positions became vacant following Mmusi Maimane and Athol Trollip’s shock resignations last month, leaving the official opposition in disarray just days after former leader Helen Zille was elected the party’s federal council chair. Zille replaced James Selfe,...The Democratic Alliance (DA) showed their hand yesterday when, as expected, they elected John Steenhuisen the party’s interim leader, and Ivan Meyer the interim federal chairperson.
Steenhuisen beat out the Gauteng provincial legislature’s Makashule Gana to the party’s top job after 160 DA members voted for him. Both Steenhuisen and Meyer will hold these positions until the party’s early congress next year.
The positions became vacant following Mmusi Maimane and Athol Trollip’s shock resignations last month, leaving the official opposition in disarray just days after former leader Helen Zille was elected the party’s federal council chair. Zille replaced James Selfe, who had served in that position for 19 years. Steenhuisen admitted they had plenty of rebuilding to do.
“The DA is not in a fight over ideology or a fight for power. Our fight is to push back against the tide of poverty that has engulfed the lives of so many men, women and children in our country. Our fight is for the prosperity and the dignity of millions of South Africans who are still waiting for their freedom,” said Steenhuisen.
“I know that the DA has both the people and the ideas to win this fight. That’s why it is critical that we waste no time in turning our setback into a comeback. But importantly, the DA also has to be a party grounded in values, and not one led by whatever happens to be the populist cause of the day. Just because we’re at the centre of our political landscape, doesn’t mean we must try to be everything to everyone,” added Steenhuisen.
Meyer said their supporters were their primary focus.
“We need to reconnect with our voters,” he said. “It’s a new journey for us.”
The DA is going through change. Every step they make will be watched closely ahead of the 2021 municipal elections.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.