The ANC in Limpopo is investigating allegations of nepotism in provincial departments, parastatals, district and local municipalities following allegations that several heads of departments, directors, mayors and section 56 and 57 managers were found to have appointed siblings and friends to critical government positions. The ANC said yesterday that some had no qualifications, skills or experience. Limpopo ANC provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane said: “This has serious comebacks which negatively affect our economy [and] our province performed dismally in terms of audits last year. “All what the auditor-general (AG) said … we do not have the right people in the right...The ANC in Limpopo is investigating allegations of nepotism in provincial departments, parastatals, district and local municipalities following allegations that several heads of departments, directors, mayors and section 56 and 57 managers were found to have appointed siblings and friends to critical government positions.
The ANC said yesterday that some had no qualifications, skills or experience.
Limpopo ANC provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane said: “This has serious comebacks which negatively affect our economy [and] our province performed dismally in terms of audits last year.
“All what the auditor-general (AG) said … we do not have the right people in the right positions to deliver the right end product.
“One of the biggest causes is that … we end up appointing relatives, pals and comrades, who do not have what it takes to deliver the job with precision and distinction.”
Lekganyane said the party was also investigating allegations of cadre deployment in Limpopo. He said cadre deployment was negatively affecting the performance of entities and killing morale.
Recently, Limpopo Premier and ANC provincial chairperson Stan Mathabatha announced his administration was dealing with several cases where certain critical positions in government had been filled by people without matric qualifications. Most had been deployed because they had served the organisation well, not because they had the right qualifications, skills or track records.
His administration had no place for cadre deployment and fraudsters, Mathabatha said.
“We appoint people based on merit and not how long or well they served the ANC.
“After taking over from former premier Cassel Mathale, over 183 senior government officials were found to have transgressed the law by doing business with their departments or municipalities, or deploying their relatives in government positions without relevant requirements, or unlawfully awarding tenders without following the right prescripts of the law,” said Mathabatha recently.
The Citizen can confirm that some of the institutions in line for the probe are Greater Tzaneen, Vhembe district and Mogalakwena municipality.
– alexm@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.