With sister brand Kia having already revealed price and spec details of its new Seltos arriving at dealers on Friday (15 November), Hyundai has now detailed its equivalent in the form of the all-new Venue.
Like its sibling, the Venue will take aim at the Ford EcoSport, Mazda CX-3 and Volkswagen T-Cross, and arrive in South Africa sporting a single petrol engine, hooked to a manual or dual-clutch transmission with drive going to the front wheels only.
Based on the automaker’s website, the line-up will consist out of five models with the Motion serving as the entry-level derivative. In this guise, the Venue sports cloth trim, a multi-function steering wheel, electric windows all around, keyless entry, electric mirrors, dual front airbags and ABS with EBD and ESP.

The next step-up Fluid adds a dark chrome grille and diamond-cut 16-inch alloy wheels, as well as partial leather upholstery, a touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, cruise control, auto on/off headlights, reverse camera with rear parking sensors, folding electric mirrors and two additional airbags.
At the sharp-end, the Glide boasts automatic air-conditioning, projector-type headlights with daytime running LEDs, a wireless smartphone charger, LED taillights, rear armrest, and the option of a two-tone paint finish with a Polar White body contrasted by a black roof.
In terms of power, the Venue mirrors the T-Cross in being powered by a 1.0 T-GDI three-cylinder motor that punches out 88kW/172Nm Said to sip unleaded at a claimed 6.5 L/100 km, the three-pot is paired to a seven-speed dual-clutch ‘box that is standard on the entire range, bar the Motion where it is optional; the standard being a six-speed manual.

With the exception of the Glide, the Venue can be had in a choice of five colours; Star Dust, Typhoon Silver, Fiery Red, Denim and Lava Orange with a five year/150 000 km warranty plus an additional two year/50 000 km powertrain warranty standard on models, along with a three year/45 000 km service plan.
PRICING
Venue 1.0 T-GDI Motion – R274 900*
 
*only model’s price so revealed thus far.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.