CRICKET
Teen blunder, daddy ton: Australia’s Warner makes Pakistan pay for error
Australia’s batsman David Warner plays a shot on day two of the first Test cricket match between Pakistan and Australia at the Gabba in Brisbane on November 22, 2019. (Photo by Saeed KHAN / AFP) / — IMAGE RESTRICTED TO EDITORIAL USE – STRICTLY NO COMMERCIAL USE —
Pakistan were left to rue a basic error from 16-year-old debutant Naseem Shah as Australia opener David Warner plundered the visitors’ attack with a brilliant 151 not out on the second day of the first Test at the Gabba on Friday.
Australia finished the day on 312 for the loss of just one wicket, 72 runs ahead of Pakistan’s first innings total of 240 and already in the driving seat.
Marnus Labuschagne was alongside Warner on 55, with the only wicket to fall that of Joe Burns, who made 97 before sweeping a Yasir Shah (1-101) delivery onto his stumps.
Warner scored his first Test century since a year-long ban for ball-tampering, but only after a huge let-off when he was caught behind off a Naseem no-ball.
The mercurial opener was on 56 at the time, and he then survived a near run-out on 93 before ending a century drought stretching back nearly two years. – AFP.
=============
Review blunders haunt New Zealand against England
New Zealand’s troubles with cricket’s Decision Review System proved costly yet again Friday after opener Tom Latham went cheaply at the start of their reply to England’s 353 in the first Test at Mount Maunganui.
Latham walked without question when rapped on the pads by Sam Curran.
But had the Black Caps sought a review, they would have found Hot Spot detected the ball had shaved the inside edge of the bat.
It is the second time in the match New Zealand have not sought a review when they should have done.
In England’s first innings, New Zealand stayed quiet when an appeal for a Rory Burns caught-behind was turned down when the batsman was on 10 and the total 14.
Again, replays showed there had been a nick and the fortunate Burns went on to make 52.
During this year’s cliff-hanger World Cup final, eventually decided on the boundary countback rule after the game was tied, New Zealand wasted their one review which ultimately brought about the early dismissal of Ross Taylor.
Early in the innings Martin Guptill was given out lbw and when he appealed, replays clearly showed he did not get an edge on the ball.
Later in the innings, the in-form Taylor was given out lbw for 15 and with their review wasted New Zealand were powerless — despite replays that showed the ball would have sailed well over the stumps.
New Zealand ended the second day on 144/4. – AFP.
=============
TENNIS
Canada reach Davis Cup semi-finals after ousting Australia
Canada became the first team to make the semi-finals of the new Davis Cup on Thursday as they clinched a tense and decisive doubles rubber to defeat Australia in Madrid.
Nick Kyrgios had declared Australia capable of winning the tournament earlier this week but he played no part against Canada, perhaps due to injury, and his country crashed out in the quarters.
Canada’s Vasek Pospisil, ranked 150th in the world, was the star of the show as he beat John Millman 7-6 (9/7) 6-4 in the singles and then formed a winning team with Denis Shapovalov in the doubles, the pair beating Jordan Thompson and John Peers 6-4, 6-4.
In between, Alex de Minaur had given Australia hope of a comeback as he battled from a set down to outlast Shapovalov 3-6, 6-3, 7-5.
“We just went out there and from the first point, we were just going maximum intensity, energy, focus,” Pospisil said. “Denis and I played extremely well. I think we clicked perfectly.”
A first victory in 10 meetings with Australia means Canada will face either Serbia and Novak Djokovic or Russia in the last four on Saturday, for a place in Sunday’s final. – AFP.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.