The Proteas’ recent struggles – a poor World Cup and an even poorer Test series against India – has prompted many to bemoan the lack of intellectual capital in local cricket.
Yet weekend reports had many excited after legendary national skipper Graeme Smith confirmed that he had been interviewed for Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) vacant director of cricket position.
It’s a potentially massive role for the 38-year-old, who would have to oversee all of domestic cricket’s structures – from age-group cricket to the national side.
While Smith undeniably possesses the cricketing pedigree, he lacks coaching and managerial experience.a
Understandably then, CSA also reportedly interviewed three other candidates.
We break them down.
GRAEME SMITH
Graeme Smith before the Group Stage match of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2019 between England and South Africa at The Oval on May 30, 2019 in London, England. (Photo Visionhaus/Getty Images)
He’s one of the most decorated international players of all time.
Not only did the imposing left-hander score over 17 000 international runs, he’s also the most successful Test captain in history with 53 victories under his leadership.
Smith also captained South Africa a record 109 times.
Known for his strong personality, he forged a reputation as a man who fully backs his own judgement and enjoys having a close group of confidantes at his side.
It always felt as if Smith concealed his cricketing IQ to an extent as a player, yet emerged as a highly astute commentator after his retirement.
He won’t lack insights on cricket, but can he combine it with the management also needed for the role?
HUSSEIN MANACK
South African coach Ottis Gibson, South African Team selector Hussein Manack and South African captain Faf du Plessis chat during the South African national cricket team training session at PPC Newlands on January 02, 2019 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Shaun Roy/Gallo Images/Getty Images)
An obdurate top-order batsman during a playing career stifled by Apartheid, this former Transvaal and Gauteng stalwart is a surprisingly solid candidate on paper, despite – like Smith – having never been a top-level coach.
However, Manack has extensive experience as a selector, serving as the Highveld Lions’ convener for three years and also a national scout for a meaty seven years.
That renders him particularly qualified to judge South African domestic structures, particularly at semi-pro and franchise level.
Those playing levels are under particular scrutiny following the Proteas’ series whitewash in India.
Manack has a level-three coaching qualification and various business qualifications related to sport management.
He also has extensive business experience overall.
CORRIE VAN ZYL
Corrie van Zyl during the CSA media briefing at CSA Head Office on April 12, 2019 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Lefty Shivambu/Gallo Images)
The complex politics of CSA are neatly exemplified by Van Zyl’s candidacy.
The governing body’s general manager for the past decade is currently suspended for “dereliction of duty” regarding image rights payments in last year’s MSL.
But CSA top management insist he’s very much in the running.
Van Zyl is the most balanced candidate.
He had an international career, a successful provincial coaching career, mentored the Proteas at the 2011 World Cup and knows SA cricket inside-out.
More importantly, he’s a man who’s navigated CSA’s political strife for years.
That makes him savvy … to say the least.
DAVE NOSWORTHY
Dave Nosworthy and Thami Tsolekile of the Lions during the 2012 MiWay T20 Challenge match between bizhub Highveld Lions and Nashua Titans from Bidvest Wanderers Stadium on March 11, 2012 in Johannesburg, South AfricaPhoto by Duif du Toit / Gallo Images
The 51-year-old has cricket running through his veins.
He was a more than useful batsman for Border and then proceeded to cultivate an extensive CV as a top-level coach.
Nosworthy was head coach of the Titans and Highveld Lions, in between jetting off to New Zealand, where he made a big impact at Canterbury, even landing the gig as New Zealand A’s head coach.
He also served as director of cricket for Somerset, one of the strongest counties on the English circuit.
Since returning home, positions locally have mysteriously dried up for the experienced coach and he’s currently director of cricket at St David’s and runs coaching clinics.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.