Once the preferred choice as a family passenger car, the sedan has become a dying breed in the age of the SUV and countless crossovers. But in the world according to Mercedes-Benz, the sedan isn’t quite extinct yet. A brand new addition, the A-Class Sedan, recently joined the three-pointed star’s line-up and we got to spend some time in the A200. Since the A-Class’ nip and tuck last year, we have already spent time in the original two siblings, the A200 and A250 hatch versions, of which we approved. As the name would suggest, the hatchback has made way for...Once the preferred choice as a family passenger car, the sedan has become a dying breed in the age of the SUV and countless crossovers. But in the world according to Mercedes-Benz, the sedan isn’t quite extinct yet.
A brand new addition, the A-Class Sedan, recently joined the three-pointed star’s line-up and we got to spend some time in the A200. Since the A-Class’ nip and tuck last year, we have already spent time in the original two siblings, the A200 and A250 hatch versions, of which we approved.

As the name would suggest, the hatchback has made way for a boot – which makes the car 10kg heavier – in the only change as Mercedes says it is catering for “many customers that require a compact sedan for small families”.
The boot has a capacity of 420l, which is 50l more than the hatch offers with the rear seats upright. But what you gain in standard form, you lose in versatility as the hatch’s rear can fold down in various configurations, with the maximum loading capacity offering all of 1 210l.

Because of the sedan being … well … a sedan, the rear seats don’t fold down, therefore offering no versatility over and above your usual loads of a few suitcases. But every once in a while when you need to load something of which the dimensions exceed the boot’s depth or opening of the rear door – let’s say a bicycle – the sedan will leave you stranded. The styling of the rear is unique and not just a C-Class rear recycled. And the fact that it is a sedan does make it look a little more distinguished than the hatch.
The A200 Sedan is powered by the M282 engine, a 1.3 litre, four-cylinder turbo powerplant which sends 120kW/250Nm to the front wheels via the 7G-DCT dual-clutch gearbox. Inside you get the full array of Merc goodies, including my favourite – the turbine-styled vents. At R533 400, the A200 Sedan is the most affordable Mercedes sedan money can buy.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.