Monday’s Protea Glen Extension 2 protest over electricity cut-offs by Eskom that occurred two months ago has not yet died down, with residents still fuming over the decision, reports Soweto Urban.
Ward 13 councillor George Mahlangu was accompanied by police officials to address angry residents who have shut down the area by burning tyres.
Protea Glen residents protest along Mpala road and Wild chestnut to voice their anger on disconnection of problems, 19 November 2019. Picture: Nigel Sibanda
Picture: Nigel Sibanda
Protea Glen is a no-go area for motorists at present, who are also advised to avoid Wildchestnut and Impala road and use other alternative routes to reach their destinations.
Mahlangu explained to residents that the issue at hand was to be solved by community members along with the councillor. They plan on going to Eskom offices to find an alternative to cutting off electricity supply to the area.
Monday’s protest action has continued.
“Eskom is supposed to be auditing finances, since it is alleged that Protea Glen Ext 2 members are not paying their electricity bills,” said Mahlangu.
The councillor is reportedly in talks with Eskom to arrange a meeting to resolve the issue.
The current situation in Protea Glen Extension 2. Image: Nigel Sibanda
Residents explained that Eskom had cut a cable that transfers electricity to their homes at around 3am while everyone was asleep.
Residents were told to pay R6,000 for the replacement of their meter boxes that were confiscated during the process of cutting the cable. Some managed to pay the amount, but their meter boxes had not yet been replaced.
Picture: Neil Sibanda

“We were not given notice by Eskom or any officials. What they did is uncalled for, as some of the residents are not working and cannot afford to buy electricity or replace their meter boxes; some use machines for breathing and now are highly affected, their health is at risk,” said Protea Glen resident Nkosinathi Mnguni.
Police officials were at the scene on Monday to clear the debris.
Residents expected Cllr Mahlangu to address them on Monday, but he never arrived. He has since said he will be working hand-in-hand with residents to solve the matter, even though residents had told him not to interfere any more.

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.