After months of speculation, pre-production spy shots and camouflaged test mules, Aston Martin officially unveiled the all-new DBX on Tuesday evening (19 November). Serving not only as Gaydon’s first SUV in its 106 year history, the DBX is also the first model to emerge from Aston’s new purpose-built factory in Wales and according to CEO Andy Palmer, “will reward all who experience it in their everyday lives”.
Shown as a two-door coupe concept four years ago, the DBX has however changed bodystyles in adopting a traditional five-door SUV design, but with traits still recognisable as that of an Aston with elements from the DBS Superleggra at the front and of the Vantage at the rear noticeable.
Styled by Marek Reichman, the DBX rides on a bespoke platform and is made entirely out of aluminium with the material in question also having been incorporated into the suspension mountings in order to keep weight to a minimum.
Featuring a double wishbone split-link front suspension and a multi-link rear setup, the DBX also comes with a tripe volume adaptive air suspension that can lower the ride height by 50 mm and raise it again by 45 mm, resulting in the approach angle increasing from 22.2 to 25.7 degrees, the departure angle from 24.3 to 27.1 degrees and the breakover from 15.1 to 18.8 degrees. Wading depth is rated at 500 mm.

In an Aston first, the DBX not only comes with Hill Descent Control and Roll-Over Stability Control, but also an active differential, six driving modes including Sport, Sport+, Terrain and Terrain+, a model bespoke Electronic Stability Control system and an electronic anti-roll control system harnessed by a 48-volt battery.
Tipping the scales at 2 245 kg, the DBX offers seating for five and according to Aston Martin, has a class-leading rear headroom of 1 016 mm and legroom of 1 060 mm. Claimed boot space is 632-litres with the 40/20/40 split rear seat up, although an additional 62-litres is available underneath the boot floor.
One of the few SUVs to sport frameless doors, the interior takes design cues from the DBS, but which “has been designed from the inside out to ensure that the cabin is spacious and comfortable with occupants able to get in and out easily”.
Despite the seats being derived from the DB11 but equipped with individual armrests, the steering wheel, switchgear and dashboard is unique to the DBX, with buyers also having the option of an extensive choice of materials and veneers ranging from Bridge or Weir leather to Caithness full-grain leather, Alcantara and wool, to Walnut, bronze mesh, carbon fibre and even linen. A variety colours can however be chosen as per the Q by Aston Martin personalisation programme.

In terms of technology and equipment, the DBX boasts a 12.3-inch TFT instrument cluster, a panoramic sunroof, a 10.25-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay, tri-zone climate control, a surround view camera system, a 64 colour ambient lighting system and a 14-speaker, 800-watt sound system developed by Harman/Samsung.
Another first is the choice of 11 accessory packs, each with a selection of personalised trimmings that range from the Touring Pack featuring a four-or-six-piece luggage set and cabin saddle bags, to a Pet Pack and even an Event Pack made up of a picnic hamper and blanket.
Riding as standard on 22-inch alloy wheels in two designs; the standard Sport or optional Ribbon with so-called interlaced spokes, the DBX’s motivation comes from the familiar 4.0-litre twin-turbocharged V8 sourced from Mercedes-AMG that produces 405kW/700Nm.
Hooked to a nine-speed automatic gearbox and with an electronic slip rear differential as well as all-wheel-drive, the DBX, despite its weight, will accelerate from 0-100 km/h in 4.5 seconds and reach a top speed of 291 km/h. Bringing it to a stop are upgraded brakes made up of an aluminium six-piston caliper setup at the front with the grooved and ventilated steel discs measuring 410 mm at the front and 390 mm at the rear.
Aimed at the likes of the Bentley Bentayga, Lamborghini Urus and the Rolls-Royce Cullinan, the DBX’s order books have already opened with pricing in the United Kingdom starting at £158 000 (R3 026 003) before options. Delivers will commence in the second quarter of next year.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.