The Springboks’ momentous World Cup triumph provides local rugby with an immense confidence boost and momentum for building on the success in Japan. With a new national coach coming in to replace Rassie Erasmus, how is South Africa’s depth in each position looking? FULLBACK First choice: Willie le Roux (Toyota Verblitz) One of the few positions in the national team where there’s a genuine sense that a new, long-term option can be groomed. Willie le Roux’s experience was clearly valued for the past two years, but he lacks the overall game to be commanding in really tight contests. South Africa...The Springboks’ momentous World Cup triumph provides local rugby with an immense confidence boost and momentum for building on the success in Japan.
With a new national coach coming in to replace Rassie Erasmus, how is South Africa’s depth in each position looking?
FULLBACK
First choice: Willie le Roux (Toyota Verblitz)
One of the few positions in the national team where there’s a genuine sense that a new, long-term option can be groomed. Willie le Roux’s experience was clearly valued for the past two years, but he lacks the overall game to be commanding in really tight contests. South Africa can’t keep on relying on his sporadic moments of brilliance.
Challengers:
Damian Willemse of South Africa releases a pass during a training session at Arcs Urayasu Park on October 29, 2019 in Urayasu, Chiba, Japan. (Photo by Dan Mullan/Getty Images)
Damian Willemse (Stormers) – Potentially the best option. He’s physical, thrives when he’s given space and has a superb boot.
Warrick Gelant (Bulls) – He showcased his attacking skills as a wing at the World Cup, but his defence and kicking remain underpowered.
Tyrone Green (Lions) – A wonderful talent in the mould of Cheslin Kolbe, with bravery one of his key traits. But he lacks experience.
Dillyn Leyds (Stormers) – Dependable and a game-breaker at times. Has lacked presence in the past. Covers wing too.
WINGS
First choices: Cheslin Kolbe (Toulouse) and Makazole Mapimpi (Sharks)
There’s envious depth here with little indication that the tap is going run dry. Both Kolbe and Mapimpi can only go from strength to strength on the back of their cracking World Cup campaigns, while S’bu Nkosi has not once looked out of place when selected. Kings Park, interestingly, has now become a hotbed for depth.
Challengers:
S’bu Nkosi (Sharks) – It almost feels like an injustice to write his name here given how brilliantly he’s adapted to Test rugby.
Aphelele Fassi (Sharks) – Quick and silky, this talented rookie provides extra value with a well-developed kicking game already. Might be an option at fullback.
Madosh Tambwe during the Currie Cup match between Xerox Golden Lions XV and Vodacom Blue Bulls at Emirates Airline Park on August 10, 2019 in Johannesburg, South Africa. (Photo by Wessel Oosthuizen/Gallo Images)
Madosh Tambwe (Sharks) – Whether he’ll get enough chances at his new franchise remains to be seen, but this lanky winger has a predatory finishing ability and his tackling has improved.
CENTRES
First choice: Lukhanyo Am (Sharks) and Damian de Allende (Wild Knights and Munster)
This combination has become a highlight in the Springboks’ pattern. De Allende has become an all-round enforcer, shedding his perception of being one-dimensional, while his partner Am provides some nuance to the equation, a brilliant defensive tactician and a (still) underrated attacker. It would be a pity to break them up.
Challengers:
Jesse Kriel (Canon Eagles) – A solid, versatile and proven option. Hopefully Japan doesn’t put him off the pace.
Andre Esterhuizen (Sharks) – Bulldozing as ever, but can he find a way to add more strings to his bow?
Burger Odendaal of the Bulls during the Super Rugby match between Vodacom Bulls and Jaguares at Loftus Versfeld on April 06, 2019 in Pretoria, South Africa. (Photo by Lee Warren/Gallo Images/Getty Images)
Burger Odendaal (Bulls) – Highly rated by John Mitchell with proven leadership abilities too. Can cover both midfield positions.
Wandi Simelane (Lions) – His pedigree as one of the most gifted young playmakers in the country is now well known. He needs to make the step up.
FLYHALF
First choice: Handre Pollard (Montpellier)
His performance in the World Cup final cemented Pollard’s place in Springbok folklore and he’s got time on his side to still improve and really become a legend. Should his availability become more limited, Elton Jantjies has grown into a decent international pivot.
Challengers: 
Elton Jantjies (Lions) – Need one elaborate on his value?
Curwin Bosch of the DCell C Sharks during the Currie Cup semi final match between Toyota Free State XV and Cell C Sharks XV at Toyota Stadium on August 31, 2019 in Bloemfontein, South Africa. (Photo by Johan Pretorius/Gallo Images)
Curwin Bosch (Sharks) – A big year coming up for him now that Robert du Preez is out of the picture. Needs to show more steel on defence in his channel.
Damian Willemse (Stormers) – The cat might be thrown among the pigeons if the national hierarchy abandon the plan to groom him as a 15. Gifted.
SCRUMHALF
First choice: Faf de Klerk (Sale)
A problem position now looks secure. If Faf de Klerk could prove influential in a more constrained environment like the World Cup, he could be devastating in friendlier, quicker southern hemisphere conditions. He should be kept on his toes though.
Challengers:
Herschel Jantjies of the Springboks scores during the 2019 Rugby Championship Test Match between New Zealand and South Africa at Westpac Stadium on July 27, 2019 in Wellington, New Zealand. (Photo by Mark Tantrum/Getty Images)
Herschel Jantjies (Stormers) – All that South African rugby needs from him is that he stays steady and doesn’t succumb to second-season syndrome. Brilliant talent.
Cobus Reinach (Northampton) – He possesses the type of maturity you want in an accomplished backup.
Embrose Papier (Bulls) – Explosive and familiar with the Springbok setup, but has some catching up to do after a reasonably poor 2019.
EIGHTHMAN
First choice: Duane Vermeulen (Kubota Spears)
Vermeulen hasn’t announced any plans on retiring from international rugby, but at 33 he might need some management if he’s to take on the British and Irish Lions in 2021. The interesting thing about filling his void is whether the national setup want to pick a like-for-like replacement or go for someone more nuanced.
Challengers: 
Dan du Preez (Sale) – Tall, imposing and massively physical, just like Vermeulen. Has grown in leaps and bounds in terms of his finer skills too.
Sikhumbuzo Notshe of Western Province on the attack during the Currie Cup match between DHL Western Province and Phakisa Pumas at DHL Newlands Stadium on August 09, 2019 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Shaun Roy/Gallo Images)
Sikhumbuzo Notshe (Sharks) – Somewhat of a forgotten man after making his Test debut under Erasmus in 2018. A move to the Sharks puts him in prime position to establish himself as the top dog at the franchise … and revive his Bok ambitions.
Juarno Augustus (Stormers) – He’s not quite as tall, but he’s a powerful ball carrier and immense tackler. A big season lies ahead.
Jaco Coetzee (Stormers) – He’s still considered an opensider, though he was simply outstanding as a No 8 when Kolisi got injured. Could this be the position where his bread is properly buttered?
BLINDSIDE FLANKER
First choice: Pieter-Steph du Toit (Stormers)
Ironically, despite South Africa generally possessing untold riches at loose forward, there’s a relative dearth of out-and-out blindsiders at the moment. The fact that one would struggle to fill Du Toit’s void currently in the national team suggests there’s work to be done to find an understudy.
Challengers:
Jean-Luc du Preez (Sale) – Undeniably has the physique and power that mirror Du Toit’s, but there’s a suspicion he lacks the finer skills to be truly imposing at international level. Also worryingly injury-prone.
Cobus Wiese (Stormers) – The fact that he’s competing with the national incumbent at his franchise means that he’s probably going to be deployed more regularly at lock. Yet that a giant club like English champions Saracens want him illustrates how highly he’s rated.
Cyle Brink (Lions) – Was part of Erasmus’ plans in 2018 before injury struck. He’s considered an all-rounder, but his relish for the collisions makes him an intriguing prospect at blindside. He needs to stay fit though.
OPENSIDE FLANKER
First choice: Siya Kolisi (Stormers)
This is one of the more enjoyable positions for the national coach to work with. Kolisi has established himself as the undisputed champion in his position and also neatly illustrates the interesting possibilities here. The Bok skipper represents the more rounded and bigger opensiders on offer, while Marco van Staden and Kwagga Smith are nippier, ball-poaching options should the need arise.
Challengers: 
Marco van Staden (Bulls) – Combines his natural breakdown abilities with a real grittiness. He probably punches above his weight, but clearly is comfortable doing so.
Phepsi Buthelezi of the Cell C Sharks during the Super Rugby match between Cell C Sharks and DHL Stormers at Jonsson Kings Park on March 02, 2019 in Durban, South Africa. (Photo by Steve Haag/Gallo Images/Getty Images)
Phepsi Buthelezi (Sharks) – Much in the same mould as Kolisi and Coetzee. The Baby Bok skipper can tantalisingly combine skill with a tall frame and become another hugely important player for SA rugby.
Marcell Coetzee (Ulster) – Experienced and classy. Adds value as an accomplished No 8 too.
Kwagga Smith (Lions) – Perhaps not a Bok flanker for tighter contests, but his explosive attacking ability and determined defending make him a cracking impact option in the southern hemisphere.
LOCKS
First choices: Eben Etzebeth (Toulon) and Lood de Jager (Sale)
There are many things that can keep a Bok coach up at night. Lock shouldn’t be one of those…
Challengers:
RG Snyman (Honda Heat/Munster) – You get the feeling he won’t be a challenger for much longer given his once-in-a-lifetime skillset. Scarily, will only improve in Ireland.
Franco Mostert (Gloucester) – What a magnificent player to have in your group. Would make any other international team.
Marvin Orie of Lions jumps for the ball during the Super Rugby Rd 1 match between Jaguares and Lions at Jose Amalfitani Stadium on February 16, 2019 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. (Photo by Daniel Jayo/Getty Images)
Marvin Orie (Lions) – Perhaps not quite as explosive as the men higher in the pecking order, but compensates with an immense workrate and excellent set-piece ability.
JD Schickerling (Stormers) – Another fine exponent who combines brain with brawn and can play in both locking positions.
TIGHTHEAD
First choice: Frans Malherbe (Stormers)
Much like the locks, the No 3 jersey was a source of immense pride for SA rugby at the World Cup. Amazingly, one could even add men like Coenie Oosthuizen (Sale) and Carlu Sadie (Stormers/Lions) to the mix. That’s how much talent is at disposal.
Challengers:
Vince Koch (Saracens) – His World Cup showing means he just needs to keep up his form to be considered an automatic choice for the Lions tour in 2021.
Wilco Louw during the DHL Western Province training session at High Performance Centre on July 16, 2019 in Cape Town, South Africa. (Photo by Ashley Vlotman/Gallo Images)
Wilco Louw (Stormers) – The manner in which he responded after missing out on World Cup selection suggests he won’t be out of the picture for much longer.
Trevor Nyakane (Bulls) – He’s matured into such an all-round, consistent performer that he just needs to start avoiding his injury curse to remain a vital part of the national setup.
HOOKER
First choices: Bongi Mbonambi (Stormers) and Malcolm Marx (Lions)
There is no question over who the top dogs are in this position. It’s now just about finding a classy third choice to fill any potential void seamlessly.
Challengers:
Scarra Ntubeni (Stormers) – Injuries have impacted on much-needed continuity in his career. Yet when he’s on song, he’s a dynamic player.
Joseph Dweba of the Toyota Free State Cheetahs during the Currie Cup match between Toyota Free State XV and DHL Western Province at Toyota Stadium on August 24, 2019 in Bloemfontein, South Africa. (Photo by Johan Pretorius/Gallo Images)
Joseph Dweba (Cheetahs) – Behind that burly frame is a lightning quick, intelligent player who’s grown in leaps and bounds due to his exposure in the Pro14.
Kerron van Vuuren (Sharks) – He’s differentiated himself as one of the most hard-working hookers in the country. His tackling is ruthless.
LOOSEHEAD
First-choice: Steven Kitshoff (Stormers)
With Beast Mtawarira announcing his retirement, a ready-made successor has been groomed in Kitshoff. It’s a dynamic the Boks will hope continues … and there are a substantial number of interesting possibilities.
Challengers:
Lizo Gqoboka of the Bulls in action during the Super Rugby match between Vodacom Bulls and Jaguares at Loftus Versfeld on April 06, 2019 in Pretoria, South Africa. (Photo by Lee Warren/Gallo Images/Getty Images)
Lizo Gqoboka (Bulls) – His ball-carrying and tackling skills are well honed. Now it’s just to convince the last few doubters over his ability to scrum well consistently.
Ox Nche (Sharks) – Will the Sharks setup be the tonic for a raw but explosive talent to realise his full potential?
Thomas du Toit (Sharks) – There’s a risk of this powerful talent being held back by an inability of his coaches to determine whether he’s a loosehead or tighthead.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.