This year’s Extreme Festival series will end on a high note at the Zwartkops Raceway near Pretoria on Saturday, with seven categories on four and two wheels taking to the tarmac.
Topping the show will be two races for G&H Transport Extreme Supercars, with the final entry of the season to boast 28 cars. Overall victory favourites must include Franco Scribante (Porsche 997 Turbo), Charl Arangies (Stradale McLaren MP4-12C), Pieter Zeelie (Toyota MR2 Supra Turbo), Franco di Matteo (Deltec Batteries Alfa GT), Jonathan du Toit (TAR Ferrari F430), Ricky Giannocarro (G&H Transport Lamborghini Gallardo) and Mark du Toit (TAR Ferrari F430).
V8 MUSCLE. Top runners in the Mobil 1 V8 Supercar races must include Franco di Matteo (Deltec Batteries Jaguar) and Mackie Adlem (Adlem Auto Jaguar). Picture: Eric Buijs
Others to watch should be drivers like Nicky Dicks (Curvent Porsche 997), Sun Moodley (Bigfoot Express Porsche GT3 Cup), Dino Scribante (Scribante Labour Porsche 997), Elwyn Steenkamp (JEYS BMW M3 Turbo) and Wynand van der Merwe (Sandton Dental Porsche GT3).
Mackie Adlem (Adlem Auto Jaguar) should be the man to beat in the Mobil 1 V8 Supercar races, challenged by people like Franco di Matteo (Deltec Batteries Jaguar), Thomas Reib (Red Bull Chevrolet Lumina), Terry Wilford (Fuchs Lubricants Falcon) Roelf du Plessis (LSP Group Mustang), Larry Wilford (Fuchs Lubricants Mustang) and JP Nortje (N4 Autocraft Chevrolet Corvette).
The MotorMart VW Challenge races should see front runners like Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo), Bevin Masters (CPS Warehouse Polo), Lyle Ramsay (Monroe Polo), Waldie Meintjies (Allwagen Polo), Gavin Ross (Norbrake Polo), JP van der Walt (Platinum Wheels Polo) and Almero van Eck (VW Polo). Stiaan Kriel (MotorMart Polo) is expected to take a podium place in Class B, to clinch the year’s overall championship title.
TIGHT STUFF. The MotorMart VW Challenge racing should be close, with Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo) one of the victory favourites. Picture: Dave Ledbitter
The Car Care Clinic SuperHatch races should see podium chasers like Jonathan du Toit (TAR Honda Civic), Brett Garland (AutObarn Honda Civic), Louis Scholtz (Car Care Clinic Honda Civic), Robert Stoltz (Episerve Opel Kadett), Tyler Scott (Jestic Opel Kadett), Shaun Smith (Pta Noord Toyota RunX), Francois Henning (River End Toyota Conquest) and Reno van Heerden (VW Polo).
The day’s closest dicing should be provided by the Hankook Formula Vee brigade, with top contenders like Jaco Schriks (Lube Station Rhema), Gert van den Berg (Hankook Rhema), Luchen Ramchander (Liqui Moly Forza), Peter Hills (Lube Fusion Rhema), Brandon Hills (Mangaza Rhema) Symm Grobler (Rhema) and Lendl Jansen (Bull Security Forza).
The Car Care Clinic 111 Sports and Saloon Car races will see more than 30 drivers facing the starter. Victory contestants must include Wouter Roos (Nathans VW Golf), Harry Arangies (Stradale Nissan 350Z), Kalyn Miller (Midas Kia Pride), Andre de Lange (ADL Audi A3), George Economides (Wealth Ave BMW 328i), Gerhard Henning (www.allmotorspares. co.za Golf GTI), Lucas Bezuidenhout (Pta Noord Lexus) and Floris Stopforth (VW Polo).
Rounding out the day’s proceedings will be two races for Bridgestone Superbike and Challenge contenders, with riders to watch including Hein McMahon (BDJ Freight BMW S1000RR), Harry Timmermann APCC BMW HP4), Sifiso Themba (Kawasaki ZX10), Francois de Villiers (Rutpin Suzuki GSXR), Naasief Wadhalla (Fast Bike Kawasaki ZX6R) and Zaidy Williams (Fast Bike Kawasaki ZX6R).
Racing apart, Zwartkops will offer a flea market, live entertainment, a kiddies’ corner, plus food and drink on sale, or you may take your own. Everybody is invited to visit the pits on foot, with the circuit’s Mini Moke trains to run between the pit gate and the various spectator points throughout the day.
The Zwartkops gates will open at 6am, with qualifying sessions in the early morning and Racing will start at 10.35 am. Admission will cost R120 per adult and R90 per student, with kids under the age of 12 to go in for free.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.