A conversation I had with mates this week went like this: “This really isn’t the time to be talking about this.” “About what?” “Do we realise how depressed we’re going to be in a few weeks’ time when we move on from Springbok excellence to the mediocrity of the Super Rugby franchises?” There’s no denying the state of franchise rugby requires attention. We’ve become used to seeing Cheslin Kolbe, Faf de Klerk, Willie le Roux, Francois Louw, Vince Koch, Frans Steyn and Cobus Reinach performing deeds that have left us ecstatic and frustrated. But after this, they’re back to their...A conversation I had with mates this week went like this:
“This really isn’t the time to be talking about this.”
“About what?”
“Do we realise how depressed we’re going to be in a few weeks’ time when we move on from Springbok excellence to the mediocrity of the Super Rugby franchises?”
There’s no denying the state of franchise rugby requires attention.
We’ve become used to seeing Cheslin Kolbe, Faf de Klerk, Willie le Roux, Francois Louw, Vince Koch, Frans Steyn and Cobus Reinach performing deeds that have left us ecstatic and frustrated.
But after this, they’re back to their overseas clubs and we’re left to wonder how they could have added competitiveness to SA’s Super Rugby challenge.
Perhaps, more frustratingly, some younger local heroes, who have enhanced their reputations as international players, also won’t be returning home to apply their newfound maturity at their franchises.
Damian de Allende and Jesse Kriel are off to Japan, as is RG Snyman.
Eben Etzebeth, provided he can prove his innocence after that weekend in Langebaan, is embarking on a French adventure with Toulon, while his lock partner, Lood de Jager, will surely be one of the best second-rowers in the English Premiership.
Handre Pollard looks set to reach a new level at Montpellier and Malcolm Marx and Kwagga Smith are “recharging” in Japan.
And Duane Vermeulen is also back in Japan.
While stars like Siya Kolisi, Pieter-Steph du Toit, Makazole Mapimpi, S’bu Nkosi, Elton Jantjies, Steven Kitshoff, Herschel Jantjies, Frans Malherbe and Damian Willemse hardly represent scraps, doubts creep in about what really keeps them here.
Is the sinking ship that is Western Province still the best place for Kolisi and company?
Will Nkosi and Mapimpi flourish under the Sharks’ new regime?
How long must Jantjies mentor Lions flyhalves almost a decade younger than him?
We won’t know until we’re actually there.
But it’s certainly not comforting.
Heinz Schenk.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.