The vehicle used by armed gunmen as a getaway car after robbing a post office in Westville, KwaZulu-Natal, has been found by police.
Brigadier Jay Naicker said the burnt-out vehicle was found after the robbery took place, in Clermont.
Naicker further revealed that the vehicle, a white bakkie, was hijacked in July this year in nearby Malvern.
ALSO READ: WATCH: Man calmly narrates while cop dodges bullets in shootout
Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo explains that armed three balaclava-clad suspects allegedly forced their way into the post office, demanding SASSA cash from a staff member. When the employee said the money had not yet arrived at the post office, the men then allegedly began to assault her, forcing her to hand over an undisclosed amount of money, as well as her jewellery.
The suspects then ran out of the post office and got into a white bakkie, which had another four occupants in it.
Two officers responding to the robbery spotted the suspects as they got into the getaway vehicle, which resulted in a shootout.
One suspect, a 34-year-old man, was shot dead in the shootout with police, and a Z88 pistol with 48 rounds of ammunition was found. The remaining suspects managed to flee the scene, and are still at large. They are believed to be armed, and used AK47 rifles and pistols in the shootout.
Police say they believe some of the other suspects may also have been injured.
Several vehicles including the police vehicle, as well as surrounding buildings were damaged in the shootout.
Westville police station has opened an inquest to investigate the robbery, and charges of robbery, attempted murder and illegal possession of a firearm and ammunition were opened.
A series of videos were uploaded to Twitter on Thursday after a group of armed men stole an undisclosed amount of cash. As they were attempting to flee the scene, on Jan Hofmeyr Road in Westville near the Westville Village Market, they were confronted by police, and a shootout ensued.

 pic.twitter.com/AXPhymqTkk
— Sbu (@SbudaChagi) November 28, 2019


 pic.twitter.com/1kmPLVRXOj
— Sbu (@SbudaChagi) November 28, 2019

KZN provincial commissioner, Lieutenant General Khombinkosi Jula, expressed his relief that the police officers were relatively unscathed after the intense shootout.
“We are challenging criminals to test our rapid response capacity this Festive Season. We remain undeterred by such attempts by criminals to intimidate us,” Jula added.
“The response displayed by our two police officers was exceptionally patriotic and selfless to say the least. I personally called and congratulated both colleagues this morning for their unwavering determination and highly commendable bravery. I will also be visiting them in the very near future”, said National Commissioner of Police, General Khehla Sitole.
Westville police are now appealing to the public to come forward should they have any information on the whereabouts of the remaining six suspects, who may be wounded and seeking medical attention. They can contact the Crime Stop number at 086000 10111, or send information via the SAPS MySAPSApp.
All callers may remain anonymous and information will be treated with strictest confidence.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.