President Cyril Ramaphosa has decided to withdraw from The Chairman’s Conversation hosted by Gauteng-based radio station Power FM, the Presidency has announced.
His participation was slated for Thursday in Johannesburg.
This comes after some civil society organisations asked him not to take part in the show, which would focus on gender-based violence.
They also asked him not to engage with Given Mkhari, the founder and head of Power FM, whose wife Ipeleng accused him of assaulting her in 2018. They were both arrested after laying assault charges against each other after an alleged violent altercation in their home.
The Mkharis subsequently withdrew their charges to resolve the matter privately.
ALSO READ: Mkharis ‘left bloody’ after other woman’s sext – report
“In the light of concerns raised by civil society organizations, Wise4Afrika and the Soul City Institute regarding the scheduled event, the President has upon careful consideration decided not to participate,” the Presidency said.
“President Ramaphosa firmly believes that he, like every other South African, has a responsibility to do everything within his means to confront gender-based violence, and to do nothing that undermines the effectiveness of the national effort.
“This is all the more critical at a time when the country is observing the annual 16 Days of No Violence against Women and Children.
“The Presidency notes that Mr and Mrs Mkhari met with representatives of certain civil society organizations and senior officials in the Presidency today, but unfortunately the resolution reached by the parties was too late to ensure his participation.
“The Presidency emphasises that the non-participation of President Ramaphosa should not be read as an endorsement of the untested allegations raised by the civil society organizations, but a carefully weighed up decision taken in the public interest,” the statement read.
“The President calls upon all social partners to work together to develop concrete principles to give guidance in instances where gender based violence is alleged outside of legal processes and the need for objective assessment of desirable action that should be taken.
“The Presidency sincerely regrets any inconvenience caused to the listeners of Power FM, other media partners and the sponsors of the event.”
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.