TENNIS
Thiem impresses as Federer-Djokovic showdown looms
This multi-exposure shows Austria’s Dominic Thiem as he serves against Serbia’s Novak Djokovic during their men’s singles round-robin match on day three of the ATP World Tour Finals tennis tournament at the O2 Arena in London on November 12, 2019. – Austria’s Dominic Thiem beat Serbia’s Novak Djokovic 6-7; 6-3; 7-6. (Photo by Glyn KIRK / AFP)
Dominic Thiem produced a scintillating display of attacking tennis to beat Novak Djokovic and qualify for the last four at the ATP Finals on Tuesday, leaving the Serbian facing a shootout against Roger Federer.
In the standout match so far at London’s O2 Arena, the Austrian fifth seed took the fight to the world number two, recovering from losing the first set to triumph 6-7 (5/7), 6-3, 7-6 (7/5)
Earlier, Federer put himself back in the mix at the end-of-season event with a 7-6 (7/2), 6-3 win against Italian debutant Matteo Berrettini in their round-robin clash.
Federer and Djokovic will face off on Thursday in a repeat of this year’s Wimbledon final to determine who else will progress from Group Bjorn Borg.
“This was really one of these special matches, what I’ve practised all my life for, all my childhood for,” Thiem said.
“Really epic one in an amazing atmosphere, beating a legend of our game. And also I’ve qualified for the semi-finals, which is the best.” – AFP.
CRICKET
Rookie batters impress for England
Zak Crawley of England bats during the tour match between New Zealand XI and England at Cobham Oval on November 12, 2019 in Whangarei, New Zealand. (Photo by Gareth Copley/Getty Images)
Dom Sibley and Zac Crawley staked their claims for England Test debuts with unbeaten centuries in their first warm-up match in New Zealand, which ended in a draw in Whangarei on Wednesday.
Stuart Broad was also in sharp form with a miserly one for 15 off nine overs against a New Zealand XI made up of fringe first class players.
Given a chance to acclimatise to New Zealand conditions, Sibley made a disciplined 100 and Crawley 103 before both retired, while Joe Root hit an unbeaten 41 at a run-a-ball pace.
In reply to England’s two for 376 declared, the New Zealand XI were four for 285 at the close of the two-day match.
In contrast to Broad’s tight performance with the ball, Jofra Archer took two for 46 off 11 overs while Ben Stokes finished with none for 33 off eight.
A three-day match against New Zealand A starts in Whangarei on Friday with the first Test beginning in Tauranga on November 21. – AFP.
Katy Perry fireworks for World T20
American popstar Katy Perry announced Wednesday she will be performing at the final of the Women’s Twenty20 World Cup in Melbourne next March before an expected record crowd on International Women’s Day.
“Aussie Aussie Aussie Oi Oi Oi!” Perry said in an Instagram post using the Australian sporting chant.
“Let’s break some records – join me in Melbourne on March 8, 2020 for the ICC @T20WorldCup Women’s Final. We’ll Roar in support of these awesome women on International Women’s Day!”
The International Cricket Council said Perry would perform both before and after the final in “what is anticipated to be the biggest women’s cricket match of all time.”
It said it was an opportunity to set a new world attendance record at a women’s sporting fixture.
The current record crowd of 90,185 was set at the 1999 FIFA Women’s World Cup final in Pasadena, California. – AFP.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.