This year’s inland circuit racing season ended in fine style at the Red Star Raceway near Delmas on Saturday, with 10 separate disciplines taking to the tarmac.
Topping proceedings were two combined races for Pre-1990 Sports Cars, Pre-1980 Saloons and Midvaal Historic Saloon Cars. Rui Campos (Porsche 911 RSR) led the first Pre-1990 Sports Car race, before falling off the track – twice. Stefan Snyders (Stenton Porsche 911 RSR) then won both races from Fred Konig (Northern Bolt Porsche 911 RSR).
Both the Universal Health Pre-1980 Saloon Car races went to Jannie van Rooyen (VW Scirocco), ahead of Johann Smith (SPS Mazda Capella) and Alan Green (Ford Escort). Brendon Parker (Blitz Spares Datsun GX Coupe) took the opening Midvaal Historics heat from Deon van Vuuren (Hoosier Mazda R100) and Travis Jensen (SV Tech Datsun 1200). Parker won race two as well, followed by Travis (SV Tech Datsun 1200) and Rene van Rensburg (SV Tech Ford Escort). The results yielded the year’s overall Midvaal Historics championship for Parker.
HISTORIC CHAMP. Brendon Parker (Blitz Spares Datsun GX Coupe) took both of Saturday’s Midvaal Historic races, winning the 2019 title in the process. Picture: Motorsportfanatix.
The first Lotus Challenge race went to Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Birkin), followed by Rudi Barnard (Barneys Birkin) and Thomas Falkiner, whose Adaptive Resources Taylon limped over the finish line after its gearbox broke on the final lap. Falkiner’s car broke down early in race two, leaving Kruger to win from Barnard and Jeff Gable (Expensive Habits Birkin). The result clinched the year’s title for Kruger.
Jason Campos (Shelby CanAm V8) took easy victories in the Motul Clubmans and Sportscar races, with Ian Smith (Shelby Can-Am) and Keagan Pottas (AIPM Honda CRX Turbo) swapping the respective second and third places.
The Liqui Moly INEX Legends brigade tackled three short heats, on account of having small fuel tanks. Devon Robertson (Big Boss Auto Legend) won the first time, chased to the finish by Gerhard Roux (Rubro Legend) and Willie Erasmus (MAD Legend). Robertson took race two as well, trailed by Erasmus and Justin Robertson (Liqui Moly Legend).
JAGGER’S DRIVE. Jagger Robertson (Liqui Moly Legend) finished in two of Saturday’s three Inex Legend races at the Red Star Raceway, to clinch this year’s title in the category. Pictures: RacePics
The third race gave Devon Robertson a hat trick, ahead of Erasmus and Gerhard Roux (Rubro Legend). Meanwhile, sixth and seven places in the respective first and third races clinched the year’s title for Jagger Robertson (Big Boss Auto Legend).
Louis van der Merwe (Liabri Swift 92) took the first Monoposto race from John Maurien (Lifestyle Galaxy Ray) and Damien Archer (Advanced Ray). Van der Merwe dropped out of race two, leaving Maurien to win, ahead of Corrie le Roux (Pigments Kawasaki) and Dalan Holton (Debelle Van Diemen).
Frans Venter (Nissan 280ZX) won the first Charlies Superspar Pursuit hansicap race ahead of Machiel Oberholzer (MercedesBenz 190E) and Kola de Klerk (Nissan 300ZX). Kobus Brits (The Wife Porsche 924) won the second time around, ahead of Brad Schafer (Porsche 944) and Bert van Aarle (Lotus Elite).
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.