RUGBY
Faf celebrates club return with Champions Cup win
South Africa’s Rugby World Cup winner Faf de Klerk made a victorious return to club duty as Sale beat 14-man La Rochelle 25-15 in the European Champions Cup on Sunday.
De Klerk lifted the Webb Ellis Trophy earlier in the month and featured for 75 minutes as the English side clinched their first win of the campaign to move second in Pool 2 behind Exeter but a point ahead of Glasgow in third place.
The French outfit played the entire second half with just 14 men after France hooker Pierre Bourgarit was dismissed for making contact with the eye of the hosts’ flanker Tom Curry.
His fellow former Lion, centre Rohan Janse van Rensburg, crossed the whitewash during the game. – AFP.
=============
CRICKET
India fast bowlers in the pink after debut day-night Test
India’s fast bowlers are enjoying a rare moment in the sun after they combined to dismantle Bangladesh in the maiden day-night Test on Indian soil.
Ishant Sharma, Umesh Yadav and Mohammed Shami took all 19 Bangladesh wickets to fall in Kolkata, a rarity on the sub-continent’s pitches where spinners usually rule.
It surpassed the record 17 wickets taken by pacemen in a home Test in 2017 against Sri Lanka, also at Kolkata’s Eden Gardens.
In the first pink-ball Test for both sides, India beat Bangladesh by an innings and 46 runs in just over two days to sweep the two-match series.
“It was always on the cards that India’s pacers would call the shots, but Bangladesh have to be disappointed at the lack of application and fight shown by their batsmen,” former India batsman VVS Laxman wrote in The Times of India on Monday.
Skipper Virat Kohli has been all praise for his pacemen and said workload management was the key to keeping them in top shape.
“They gained more experience, now they’re bowling well together,” Kohli told reporters after India sealed the one-sided win on Sunday. – AFP.
=============
Black Caps’ Pretoria-enforcer helps thrash English
New Zealand’s Neil Wagner (R) celebrates with teammate and wicketkeeper BJ Watling (C) after dismissing England’s Stuart Broad to win the test match during the fifth day of the first cricket test between England and New Zealand at Bay Oval in Mount Maunganui on November 25, 2019. (Photo by DAVID GRAY / AFP)
A fiery five-wicket burst from Neil Wagner sealed a comprehensive innings and 65 runs victory for New Zealand over England late on the final day of the first Test in Mount Maunganui on Monday.
It put New Zealand in an unbeatable position in the two-Test series and extended their home streak to a remarkable seven series without defeat.
England were on the ropes with only two wickets remaining at tea before Sam Curran and Jofra Archer staged a late rally with a 59-run stand for the ninth wicket.
But with fewer than 22 overs remaining in the match, Wagner (5/44) brought proceedings to an abrupt halt when he removed Archer and Stuart Broad, the last man in, with successive balls. – AFP.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.