For South African motorsports enthusiasts, the year’s ultimate highlight will arrive this weekend, with the Kyalami 9-Hour race, to settle the season’s Intercontinental GT Challenge.
The race – returning to these shores after an absence of 37 years – will see 29 exotic sports race cars facing the starter at 1 pm on Saturday, with 20 of them competing for points in this year’s only global GT3 championship. The series’ eight full-season manufacturers – Audi Sport, Bentley, BMW, Ferrari, Honda, MercedesAMG, Nissan and Porsche – will be joined in the race by Aston Martin and Lamborghini entries.
LOCAL HERO. Topping the South African contingent will be Kelvin van der Linde, the leading driver in this Audi Sport R8 LMS GT3
Topping the list will be four Mercedes-AMG cars, the team that leads both the manufacturers’ and drivers’ championships. The Mercedes drivers in line for the individual titles are Maxi Buhk and Luca Stolz, representing the GruppeM and SPS Automotive Performance teams respectively.
Also in the reckoning to take the drivers’ title will be Audi Sport’s Frederic Vervisch, who will share an Audi R8 LMS GT3 with South African Kelvin van der Linde and Dries Vanthoor. A second R8 LMS GT3 will be entered by the Land Motorsport team.
Other South Africans taking to the tarmac will be Jordan Pepper (Bentley Continental GT3), Sheldon van der Linde (Schnitzer BMW M6 GT3), David Perel (Rinaldi Ferrari 488 GT3), Charl Arangies/ Craig Jarvis/Dawie Joubert (Stradale Lamborghini Huracan), Kishoor Pitamber/Michael Stephen (Pablo Clark Ferrari 488 Italia), Gennaro Bonafede/Michael van Rooyen (Walkenhorst BMW M6 GT3) and Andre Bezuidenhout/Franco Scribante/Silvio Scribante (Perfect Circle Porsche 997 GT3 R).
FORMIDABLE. Porsche will tackle the 9-Hour race with 12 works drivers in four 911 GT3 R models
Porsche, the only marque capable of beating Mercedes-AMG to the manufacturers’ crown, will field 12 works drivers in the respective GPX Racing, KUS Team 75 Bernhard, Dinamic Motorsport and Frikadelli Racing teams. Bentley, Nissan and Honda will be represented by their full-season teams, while BMW will see the Walkenhorst team running two M6 models, and Team Schnitzer one. Ferrari’s intercontinental hopes will rest with Rinaldii Racing, while three Aston Martin vantages will start, courtesy of Blancpain GT Series regulars R-Motorsport and Garage 59.
The race will start at 1 pm on Saturday and end at 10pm, which means enthusiasts will be able to witness hours of night racing. Serious race cars look their absolute best in the dark, with flaming exhausts and glowing disc brakes adding to the already formidable spectacle, just as spectators start running the risk of becoming tired.
For some reason, race cars just appear faster and sound louder at night, bringing us a sight we seldom get to experience. Spectators should note that the 9-Hour drivers will qualify between 2.45pm and 3.45pm on Friday, during which time the weekend’s quickest overall lap times will be set. See you at Kyalami.
Weekend Plan

Starting on Friday morning, a combined field of Falken Polo Cup and MotorMart VW Challenge cars will take to the circuit, with their practice, plus qualifying sessions during the day, and their first race late in the afternoon.
Race two will be held on Saturday morning, with a field of some 45 cars on track. Other wheeled entertainment will include the Soweto Drift 60-minute challenge around the handling track on Friday, while the same venue will cater for the driving of karts by both adults and children.
To honour the history of the Kyalami 9 Hour – which first tookplace at the circuit in 1961 – classic and rare cars from the 1960s and 1970s, including Ferrari, Porsche, Lamborghini, Mercedes-Benz and BMW, will be on display and take part in circuit parades. For the rich, there will be helicopter flips, Hot Laps on the main circuit and pit lane walks. Saturday will offer a music concert in the afternoon, with Black Coffee, Shekinah, Lemon and Herb, Jullian Gomes, Trancemicsoul and Culoe de Song on stage.
Tickets come in all shapes and sizes – including general access, trackside zone, fan zone and pit lane hospitality. Each category has several options, meaning there is a price suited to every fan’s pocket. There will be a 20% discount for any purchase of five or more tickets. To peruse and choose the best ticket for you and your family visit howler.co.za/events/kyalami-9-hour-2019-88a7/tickets.
Parking will be available on Friday and Saturday only at R100 per car, payable in cash at the gate. Bring gazebos, umbrellas and camping chairs on to the grounds. No alcohol, glass, weapons, hubblys, braais, fires or flammable items, drones or drugs will be allowed on the grounds.
Other than Uber, Bolt and taxis – with the drop off and collection at the main entrance – there will be a park and ride option from Mall of Africa. For more details visit kyalami9hour.com, Facebook @Kyalami9hour or Instagram @Kyalami9hour v Gates open: Thursday – 7.30 am to 7.30 pm, Friday – 7 am to 8 pm and Saturday – 7 am to 11 pm.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.