What do world-renowned leaders Warren Buffett, Johan Rupert, Elon Musk, Aliko Dangote, Anil Agarwal, Koos Bekker, Arian24a Huffington, Patrice Motsepe, Bill Gates, Nicky Oppenheimer and Serena Williams have in common?
According to one of South Africa’s youngest multimillionaires, 24-year-old Sashin Govender, business and sporting leaders believe success is 80% psychology and 20% mechanics.
“Success in life comes down to a mindset change – your biggest asset, which you have to take control of. The focus should be on the psychology of winning, instead of concentrating on potential failures,” says Govender.
The Durban-born entrepreneur, motivational speaker and sales coach is part of a distinguished international line-up of eminent speakers scheduled to address the four-day Winning Edge – Africa’s first entrepreneurial summit in Johannesburg from today.
Others to address the business and personal development conference include award-winning business mogul Shaahin Cheyene, brain coach Jim Kwik, podcast founder Ken Rutkowski and personal branding image specialist Sandy Grigsby – all from the United States.
Los Angeles-based multimillionaire Kwik, who earns $200,000 (R3 million) to coach an individual per day, is CEO of Kwik Learning and a speed-reading, memory improvement and optimal brain performance expert. He is also a brain trainer for Virgin, Nike, Fox Studios and Harvard University.
Of the event, Govender said: “This has never been done before in Africa where every industry under the entrepreneurial umbrella unites.
“You will learn how to recreate yourself to have a better view of success. Identifying your next move towards your goals, learning how to scale your business to the next level, mastering the art of connecting and rebranding your business and yourself, are among things to be learnt from this important gathering.
“Understanding how to maximise your brain and mind is also in store.”
Creator of The Millionaire Student brand, Govender’s motto is to “work like you are broke” and “remain in student mode”.
Within six years, Govender grew his direct sales business to over 74,000 affiliate marketers. Today, his platform grows by several hundreds of affiliates per week and generates over $2 million per month in membership fees.
Govender has business partners in over 40 countries in six continents.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.