A humble, thoughtful man with a slow voice – that’s the newly appointed MEC of health in Gauteng.
He is ready to work and doesn’t dwell on strategising, saying the time for turnaround strategies and recovery plans is over. He appeared serious as he outlined how he would move the strife-torn provincial department forward.
Dr Bandile Masuku, a typical product of the ANC Youth League and student politics, was born in Soweto 43 years ago.
He completed his matric at Sekano Ntoane Secondary School, which produced struggle luminaries such as President Cyril Ramaphosa.
Growing up in a family of health professionals might have contributed to his personality as a caring person and an understanding doctor.
He followed in their footsteps when, in 1994, he enrolled for Bachelor of Science degree at Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University in Pretoria, then known as Medical University of South Africa (Medunsa). He has also completed a master’s degree in obstetrics and gynaecology from University of Witwatersrand.
He grew up in the youth league and was merely an understudy in the ANC as he was new and had not occupied a senior post in the party.
“I have been a political student activist all my life,” Masuku said.
Leadership is not foreign to Masuku: he was president of the Medunsa’s student representative council and also played a major role in government committees.
“I was coordinating the subcommittee of education and health under Dr Zweli Mkhize and have been a part of several boards in education and health, including the office of health standards compliance,” Masuku said.
Before deciding to take over the duty of “serving”, as he calls his new job, he practised at different hospitals, specialising in obstetrics and gynaecology. But he left the medical world a year ago to join ANC politics full-time.
“I wanted to avail my skills and be at service of the ANC and the people,” he said.
Masuku is a dedicated Orlando Pirates fan.
“My father was a soccer player so all of us at home are fans. Sports are like our daily activity,” he said.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.