Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) deputy president Floyd Shivambu on Monday shared a clip of the party’s leader, Julius Malema warning the president in parliament that his party was “watching” him.
In the clip, Malema “cautioned the comrade, and additionally advised him to voluntarily disclose the funders who bought the ANC conference”, Shivambu tweeted.
Shivambu’s sharing of the clip follows a report in News24 over the weekend which exposed leaked emails which show, among other things, that Ramaphosa was involved to some extent in the funding process for his campaign, something he had previously denied.
The clip dates back to May, following the swearing-in of most of SA’s members of parliament (MPs).
READ MORE: Malema tells Ramaphosa: We elected you, not the Ruperts or Oppenheimers
“Comrade president, Stellenbosch is a big problem. We know your proximity to Stellenbosch. We know your proximity to [the] Oppenheimers. We have not elected Oppenheimers. We have not elected Stellenbosch here. I told your predecessor [Jacob Zuma] in 2011 that we have not elected the Guptas, we elected him, and he must lead us. He refused to listen to that,” Malema had said.
“We are warning you, Mr President: we have not elected the Ruperts here. We have not elected the Oppenheimers. Listen to the collective wisdom of the people you were elected with, not white monopoly capital. It will not be here to defend you.
“Once you listen to white monopoly capital, you must know that you are likely not to finish your term.
“All the best, president. We are here. We are watching you.”
At this point, Shivambu’s clip cuts out, but after this Malema had said: “And we will continue to engage you openly, not in secret.”
Earlier in the same speech, Malema told Ramaphosa not to go against Chapter 9 institutions, in a foreshadowing of the president’s current legal battles against Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane following her release of a report finding him guilty of having misled parliament. The president is seeking a judicial review of the report.
READ MORE: Malema warns Ramaphosa to come clean on donations
“You must never, ever, listen to those who say you are right, but are against the courts of South Africa; against Chapter 9 institutions. Those are the institutions that are meant to defend our democracy,” Malema said.
While according to Shivambu, in the clip Malema advised the president to disclose his CR17 funders, he does not say this directly.
He did, however, say this about a month later, during the debate on the president’s state-of-the-nation address.
“We want the president to come clean, to explain, and take the country into his confidence as to who are the people who donated money to the CR17 campaign and what do they stand to benefit,” he said.
(Background reporting, Charles Cilliers)


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.