Transnet has welcomed a ruling on Monday by the High Court in Johannesburg confirming that law firm MNS has the authority to act on the state-owned corporation’s behalf in pursuing those involved in state capture.
In a statement issued on behalf of Transnet chairperson, Dr Popo Molefe, the state-owned entity (SOE) said MNS Attorneys is one of a number of law firms that provides services to Transnet and was recently the target of a smear campaign because of support for the Popo Molefe Foundation, a charitable foundation run by the chairperson of Transnet.
“Since 2017, MNS has conducted a broad range of forensic investigations and legal action on behalf of Transnet. This has led to the recovery of more than R600 million that was misappropriated from Transnet during the state capture period,” the statement reads.
One of the firm’s key focuses has been the removal of former Transnet Group CEO Siyabonga Gama, the statement reads.
“This included serving summonses against him recently for the recovery of R189 million which Transnet argues is due to the company.
“Gama yesterday contested MNS’ right to act on behalf of Transnet – a claim that was dismissed by the high court, along with a punitive costs order.
“The significance of this should not be underestimated,” said Transnet chairperson Popo Molefe. “Some people who do not like what we are doing have tried to make a meal out of the role that lawyers are playing in ensuring justice, even though they act with a strict mandate from Transnet management.
“The court ruling confirms the correctness of the approach that we have taken to all those involved in the state capture project. We have lawyers who identify wrongdoing, conduct investigations on our behalf, and prepare summonses. That is the way it works.
“The court has confirmed the lawyers’ authority to act on behalf of Transnet and in so doing opened the way for us to begin to recoup more of the millions that have been siphoned out of the business.
“We trust that the other rogues who stole money from Transnet will show more respect next time they are served with a legal summons.”
(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.