Officially, the event’s premier offering will be two races for Global Touring Cars. Current season points leader Simon Moss (All Power Audi) will face off against Volkswagen Motorsport Jetta drivers Daniel Rowe and Keagan Masters, Johan Fourie (EPS Couriers BMW), Michael van Rooyen (Gazoo Toyota Corolla), Robert Wolk (Investchem BMW), and Tschops Sipuka (All Power Audi).
Brad Liebenberg (VW Motorsport Golf GTI) will be the man to beat in the GTC2 class, challenged by people like Adrian Wood (Kyocera Golf GTI) Charl Smalberger (Universal Health Golf GTI), Paul Hill (Ford Focus ST) and Robert Neil (Deimon Mining Ford Focus).
The day’s closest racing should be provided by the Falken Polo Cup category, with the ultra-fast circuit making for many slip-streaming opportunities. Top contenders should include Brad Liebenberg (Hello Moto Polo), Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Polo), Clinton Bezuidenhout (Glyco Engines Polo), Justin Oates (Total Excellium Polo), Jason Campos (Campos Transport Polo), Delon Thompson (Universal Health Polo), Darren Oates (Total Excellium Polo) and Dario Busi (Upstream Connect Polo).
PODIUM CHASER. Julian van der Watt (RDSA Mygale) should challenge for Investchem F1600 race victories.Picture: Paul Bedford
Topping the Investchem Formula 1600 entry list will be Scott Temple (Road to Race Mygale), facing off against the likes of Nicholas van Weely (Magnificent Paints van Diemen), Julian van der Watt (Wulfchiptegnik Mygale), Tiago Rebello (TRMS Mygale), Siyabonga Mankonkwana (Investchem Mygale), Andrew Schofield (Investchem Mygale) and Alex Gillespie (ERP Trucking Mygale).
Racing together, the South African Superbike 1 000cc and 600cc racing brigades should provide spine-chilling spectacle on a circuit where the big bikes achieve speeds of over 290km/h. Clinton Seller (King Price Yamaha R1) should be the man to beat in the Superbike category, facing off against veteran Lance Isaacs (BMW S1000R), David McFadden (Yamaha R1), Garrick Vlok (Yamaha R1), Byron Bester (HiTech Yamaha R1) and Dylan Barnard (Yamaha R1).
CLOSE. Saturday’s most competitive racing should be provided by the Falken Polo Cup brigade.Picture: Dave Ledbitter
Blaze Baker (King Price Yamaha R6) will top the 600cc entry list, against riders like Taric van der Merwe (Hi-Tech Yamaha R6), Dino Iozzo (Hi-Tech Yamaha R6), Brandon Staffen (Yamaha R6) and Jared Schultz (Yamaha R6). Rounding out the event’s activities will be two races for Border Modified Saloon Cars.
The gates will be open from 7am, with racing to commence at 10am. The East London Grand Prix Circuit is at the end of Potters Pass off the R72 Settlers Way. Locals can purchase early bird tickets from the BMSC Office, at several outlets in the city or at the gate on raceday.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.