Top billing belongs to the MotorMart Volkswagen Challenge brigade, with 26 competitors scheduled to face the starter. Top contenders should include Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo), Lyle Ramsay (Monroe Polo), Waldie Meintjies (Allwagen Polo), Bevin Masters (CPS Warehouse Polo), Stiaan Kriel (Kalex Polo), Mohamed Dangor (MotorMart Polo), Gavin Ross (Norbrake Polo), Chris Dale (Blue Belt Polo) and Elna Croeser (Race Tchnology Polo).
A wide variety of cars will contest the Car Care Clinic SuperHatch races, with probable podium chasers being Jonathan du Toit (TAR Honda Civic), Brett Garland (autObarn Honda Civic), Louis Scholtz (Car Care Clinic Honda Civic), Nic Martin (RDG Peugeot 207), Tyler Scott (Episerve Opel Kadett), Wouter Roos (Nathan’s Polo), Vernon Stoltz (Jestik Opel Kadett) and Tiaan Smith SPS Javrec VW Golf).
The day’s biggest entry will be provided by the Car Care Clinic 111 Sports and Saloon Cars category, with 29 contenders taking to the tarmac. Top contenders must include Wouter Roos (Nathan’s Golf GTI), Andre de Lange (Roofsure Audi A3), George Bezuidenhout (Accolade Nissan Primera), JP Nortje (N4 Autocraft Golf), Troy Marais (Dynamic Tyre BMW M coupe), Ebrahim Peck (Gear Down VW Golf), Kevin Miller (Ford Focus), Phillip Emmenis Rotary BMW M3), Ryan QuanChai (BMW Z4) and Lucas Bezuidenhout (Pta Noord Lexus).
The event’s closest competition should be the Hankook Formula Vee brigade, with the tight and tricky Zwartkops layout leading to side-by-side cornering and unpredictable results. Frontrunners will include Jaco Schriks (Lube Station Rhema), Gert van den Berg (Hankook Rhema), Lushen Ramchander (TRA Forza), Peter Hills (Lube Fusion Rhema), Symm Grobler (Rhema), Brandon Hills (Mangaza Rhema), Lendl Jansen (Bull Security Forza) and Vaughn Hills (Hankook Rhema).
Lovers of single seater racing will also be treated to Formula Monoposto heats, with top con tenders looking to be Org Geldenhuys (Abacus Speads), John Maurien (Life Style Ray), Antwan Geldenhuys (Abacus Myhale), Karen Geldenhuys (Abacus Swift), Vaughn Hills (Hankook Sting), Koos Posthumus KMZM Formula M) and Clayton le Roux (Pigments Formula M).
Topping the two-wheeler programme will be races for Red Square Kawasaki Masters contenders, with victory challengers likely to include Graeme van Breda (Stefanutti Stocks ZX10), Jonty Collard (Pappaz Pizza ZX10), Jaco Gous (Kawasaki ZX10), Johan le Roux (Avidan ZX10), Appanna Ganapathy (ART ZX10), Gareth Bezuidenhout (Kawasaki ZX10) and Brian Bontekoning (Moyair ZX10).
Sifiso Themba (Kawasaki ZX10) should be a victory favourite in the Bridgestone Superbike events, challenged by people like Hendrik de Bruin (NETCB Yamaha R1), Hein McMahon (Bdj Freight BMW S1000RR), Luca Bertolini (Izinga Worx Yamaha R1), Nicholas Gertenbach (BMW S1000RR) and Byron Rothquel (Magmagic BMW S1000RR).
Rounding out the programme will be Bridgestone Challenge races, with front runners to include Naasief Wadwalla (Fastbike Kawasaki ZX10), Francois de Villiers (Rutpin Suzuki GSXR), Corrie Goosen (Live Your Dream Yamaha R1) and Zaidy Williams (Fastbike Kawasaki ZX6).
The Zwartkops gates will open at 7am, with qualifying sessions in the early morning. Racing will commence at 10am. Zwartkops will offer more than racing, with the pit area having live music, a flea market, a beer garden, a kiddie’s corner, face painting and clowns.
Everybody is invited to visit the pits on foot at any time, and the Zwartkops Mini Moke trains will run between the pit gate and grandstands all day. Food and drink will be on sale or you may take your own. Parking is free and plentiful, with grandstand seating free. Admission is R120 per adult and R90 per student, with children under the age of 12 free.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.