Officially, the day’s premier events were two races for the MotorMart VW Challenge. Lyle Ramsay (Monroe Polo) took both of the day’s victories, leading home Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo) and Waldie Meintjies (Allwagen Polo) on both occasions. Bevin Masters (CPS Warehouse Polo) and Gavin Ross (VW Polo) took turns in fourth places, respectively.
The opening race for Car Care Clinic 111 Sports and Saloon Cars went to Lucas Bezuidenhout (Pta Noord Lexus), chased to the flag by Wouter Roos (Nathans Golf GTI) and girl racer Kalyn Miller (Midas Kia Pride). Miller added to the day’s significance when she won race two in her litt le Kia, followed by Roos and Phillip Emmenis (Rotary BMW E36).
The first Car Care Clinic SuperHatch race was won by Brett Garland (autObarn Honda Civic), ahead of Louis Scholtz (Car Care Clinic Honda Civic) and Tyler Scott (Episerve Opel Kadett). Garland dropped out of race two, leaving Scott to win from Scholtz and Graeme Nathan (Nathan’s Polo).
Gert van den Berg (Hankook Rhema) won both the Hankook Formula Vee races, closely followed on both occasions by Jaco Schriks (Lube Station Rhema). Symm Grobler (Rhema) and Lushen Ramchander (TRA Forza) took turns in third.
Antwan Geldenhuys (Abacus Mygale FF) won the first Formula Monoposto race from Org Geldenhuys (Speads) and Clayton le Roux (Pigments Formula M). Geldenhuys won race two from Karen Geldenhuis (Abacus Division Swift) and Clayton le Roux (Pigments Formula M).
Lady racer Landi Sinden provided a huge highlight by winning the opening Bridgestone Challenge race on her Milwaukee Yamaha R6, one 100th of a second ahead of Corrie Goosen (Live Your Dream Yamaha R1). Third, another 10th of a second adrift was fellow lady racer Morongoa Mahope (Kawasaki ZX6).
Landi Sinden (Milwaukee Yamaha R6) became the first woman to win an Extreme Festival motorcycle race. Picture: Tony Alves.
Sinden made history by becoming the first woman to win a Superbike race at an Extreme Festival event. Goosen won race two, chased to the flag by Mahope and Sinden.
Both the Bridgestone Superbike races went to Hendrik de Bruin (NETCB Yamaha R1), followed by Luca Bertonili (Izinga Worx Yamaha R1). Harry Timmerman (APCC BMW HP4) and Hein McMohan (BDJ Freight BMW S1000R) respectively completed the podium.
Graeme van Breda (Stefanutti Stocks ZX10) won the opening Red Square Kawasaki Masters race from Jaco Gous (Kawasaki ZX10) and Michael Smit (Kawasaki ZX10). Van Breda fell in race two, leaving Gous to win ahead of Smit and Brian Bontekoning (Moyair ZX10).
The next race meeting at the Zwartkops Raceway will be a Historic and Inland Tour event on Saturday, September 7.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.