Topping the bill will be two races for Midvaal Historic Cars. Frontrunners should include Deon van Vuuren (Hoosier Supa Quick Mazda R100 Rotary), Brendon Parker (Blitz Motor Spares Datsun GX Coupe), Travis Jensen (SV Tech Datsun 1200), Ian Kilburn (Collectible Wheels Datsun GX Coupe), Riaan Roux (Addfin VW Scirocco), Franz Jensen (Datsun 1200), Andries Draper (Auto Classic Ford Escort) and Eugene Gouws (Master Mowers Fiat 124 Sport).
The day’s biggest field will be provided by the Lotus Challenge brigade, with 21 cars in action. Fighting for victory should be drivers like Thomas Falkiner (Adaptive Resource Taylon Toyota), Clive Wilmot (Birkin Toyota) and Brad Beningfield (General Energy Systems Caterham 7).Apart from two sprint races, the Lotus Challenge drivers will have the option to tackle a 45-minute endurance race at the end of the day.
Tight competition can be expected in the races for Liqui Moly Inex Legend cars, with the Red Star Raceway layout generally ensuring slip-streaming battles in the category. Jason Loosemoore (Yamaha Legend) should count among the favourites, alongside Richard van Heerde (Browndeck Roofing Legend), Ian Upton (RU Legend), Jagger Robertson (Big Boss Auto Legend), Andre Larsson (Enviro Aire Legend) and Justin Robertson (Liqui Moly Legend).
The Bridgestone Challenge races will see a variety of motorcycles on the grid. With Red Star initially designed for motorcycle racing, riders love the place and Saturday’s races should again show why. Victory challengers should include Naasief Wadvalla (FastBike Kawasaki ZX6R), Zaidy Williams (FastBike Kawasaki ZX6R), Tyreece Robert (Suzuki GSXR600) and Hennie Swanepoel (Yamaha R1).
The Red Star gates will be open from 7am, with all the practice and qualifying sessions held in the morning. Racing will commence at 10am and admission cost sR50 per adult, with kids under the age of 12 free. Food and drink will be on sale or you may take your own. For more information, call Shelley-Anne Taylor at 082 468 9200.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.