The ANC in Limpopo is divided over the control of the controversial Mogalakwena local municipality, where two councillors were gunned down a fortnight ago.
The divisions within the party continued to play themselves out this weekend during the funeral of municipal public accounts committee chairperson, Valtyn Kekana.
Kekana had been with ANC branch secretary Ralph Kanyane when unknown gunmen opened fire on them, killing them on the spot.
In 2014 and 2015, the late chief whip, Leka Lekalakala, and Madimetja Pale were also gunned down.
Speaking during the funeral of Kekana in Moshate village outside Mokopane at the weekend, ANC provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane expressed deep concern over the killings.
He called on the provincial and national leadership of the ANC to urgently decide on the future of the Waterberg regional executive committee (REC) and the Mogalakwena municipality.
Lekganyane’s call came right on the heels of a statement from his detractors, who accused him of being behind the massive Mokopane shutdown.
During the shutdown, incensed community members called for the disbandment of the council and the axing of municipal mayor Andrina Matsemela.
The disenchanted members alleged Matsemela had hired the hitmen responsible for the killings.
The statement further accused Lekganyane of being responsible for the 2011/2012 collapse of the Limpopo provincial government, which saw six provincial departments placed under administration.
The ANC regional leadership, however, lambasted those calling for Matsemela’s removal.
The leadership said their call was divisive and lacked substance.
Party regional secretary Jacob Moabelo called on those making the allegations to first produce proof.
“The writing is now on the wall that the PEC of the ANC is not speaking from the same page with its regional leadership.
“The same goes to the PEC, which is now divided down the middle over the rich Mogalakwena municipality. This is so because everyone wants to loot,” said an anonymous PEC source after the funeral.
In the past 12 months, the ANC has lost five members in different suspected hits in Limpopo.
The first was of Thabang Maupa of Fetakgomo/Tubatse municipality, then two Vhembe district municipality Samwu leaders, Ronald Mani and Timson Musetsho, who were killed in January.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.