Size matters. Trust me. If it’s too small – or too big – it causes problems. In the last week, I was reminded of this twice.
Now I’m not a very big bloke. There are no triple Xs on my shirt labels. But let’s just say there’s nothing medium about me either.
My friends say I’m big enough to drive a small car – and I do. It’s a little bakkie that can carry a load, but it makes parking a pleasure. I don’t need to do a 69-point-turn in the parking garage to get in or out.
Going shopping for clothes the other day, I realised just how under-sized the parking spaces in most malls are, compared to the size of some of the vehicles.
After returning from my spree, I discovered that my bakkie was flanked by two giant SUVs.
Unfortunately, I wasn’t carrying a tin opener with me, so there was no way I could get into my car.
The gap between the cars was so small, my shadow couldn’t even fit.
But battling with a small parking space wasn’t half as difficult as trying on clothes in a fitting room cubicle.
That thing must have been constructed by a Chinese toddler. And with the door opening inwards, I had to do a 360-degree vertical swivel-movement just to get in.
And that’s a move I last did during Volkspele in primary school. Back then we called it tiekiedraai.
Getting in was one thing. Staying in and trying to have fun was a whole different ball game.
A professional contortionist would have been proud of the moves I choreographed just to untie my boot laces. And by the time I managed to not only get into a 36 skinny jean, but also to peel it off my body again, I was done.
But I wasn’t alone. Judging from the sounds coming through the paper-thin dry-walls, someone was either shooting a documentary on claustrophobia with a cast of 20 in the cubicle next door, or hosting a swingers party.
I couldn’t help but wonder what I sounded like, especially with all the shoppers laughing and pointing at me on my way out the shop.
Danie Toerien
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.