The death of former Bosasa boss Gavin Watson did not spell an end to the probe and prosecution of other individuals linked to the facilities management company’s allegedly corrupt activities, a legal expert said yesterday.
With unconfirmed reports emerging that Watson had funnelled as much as R500 million offshore and planned to skip the country, police spokesperson LtCol Katlego Mogale could not say whether the fresh details would form part of the investigation on Watson, who died in a car crash near OR Tambo International Airport on Monday.
His death came on the eve of an expected appearance before a South African Revenue Service inquiry into his tax compliance.
“We can’t give any details on the scope of our investigation yet,” said Mogale.
Commenting on the legal implications of Watson’s death, Institute for Accountability in Southern Africa director Paul Hoffman said any prosecution on corruption and malfeasance involving Bosasa directors and government officials hinged on “real evidence, such as videos, audios, books and accounting records delivered by Angelo Agrizzi and other witnesses at the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture”.
The company’s former chief operating officer showed inquiry chair Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo dramatic footage of Watson counting R1 million destined for “bribes”.
Hoffman said the footage, audio recordings and accounting records constituted “real evidence” that could see other Bosasa directors and government officials who received bribes, being “legally pursued and prosecuted”.
“Without [Watson] putting his side of the story, documents will have to tell the story. This will certainly prove evidence of corruption,” said Hoffman. “The audit trail does not disappear when someone dies [and] the prosecution of those he was linked with in wrongdoing continue.”
During his testimony, Agrizzi told Zondo how billions were siphoned from the department of correctional services in questionable tenders, with the assistance of senior government officials. This was in contravention of the Constitution, which provides for state organs, when contracting for goods and services, to do so “in accordance with a system which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective”.
Hoffman continued: “Following Mr Watson’s death, law enforcement and prosecuting agencies are expected to swoop on his estate to establish whether it is not built on any proceeds of crime.
“If his wealth cannot be explained, then the only thing left is attachment to recoup ill-gotten riches from the state, which should be forfeited … back to government.
“If law enforcement agencies cannot find anything in his estate except for a broken BMW, then there will be nothing to attach.”
Asked whether Agrizzi could be prosecuted, Hoffman responded: “The best thing the [National Prosecuting Authority] can do is to enter into a deal with Agrizzi, to give evidence … in exchange for his freedom from prosecution.”
– brians@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.