Wierdabrug police held an awareness campaign in Centurion last week to educate residents on what to do in the case of a hijacking, reports the Centurion Rekord.
“When one is confronted with hijackers, the aim is to survive,” said police spokesperson Captain Agnes Huma.
Huma together with Wierdabrug officers educated motorists and passersby on the corner of Hendrik Verwoerd Drive and Old Johannesburg Road on Wednesday morning.
The initiative was held in cooperation with Sports Against Crime and local security company Copwatch.
“When faced with a hijacking you must accept that you will lose your vehicle,” Huma said. “Remember that property can be replaced – but lives cannot.
“Do not reach for your purse or valuables as this may be seen as threatening by hijackers and you may get hurt.
“Leave everything in the vehicle and do not throw away your keys. Hand them over and comply.”
If you have a baby, child or pet in the backseat, which the hijackers might not have noticed, Huma suggested informing them.
“Phone the police immediately after the hijackers have left the scene,” she said.
“Note any identifying marks on any other getaway vehicles the hijackers may be using.”
The police also handed out information on what to do when faced with other crimes such as house or business robberies, domestic violence and so on.
“We were not conducting any stop-and-searches so we were able to get the information out to residents without disturbing them,” said Huma.
During the initiative, some local residents stopped to thank the police for their assistance and for being visible in the area.
On Friday, a similar operation took place at the Olievenhoutbosch taxi rank.
“Residents were given over 200 pamphlets informing them about hijacking hotspots in the area,” said Olievenhoutbosch police spokesperson Constable Ulrika van Dyk.
“They were given safety tips on how to avoid becoming a victim.”
Anyone who falls victim to a hijacking has been urged to report the crime to the nearest police station or to call 08600-10111.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.