A Khayelitsha mother who gave birth to quadruplets last year was struck by tragedy when one of the children died.
Inga Mafenuka made headlines when she gave birth to two girls and two boys at Tygerberg Hospital in July 2018.
A neighbour, Stella Booi, confirmed to News24 that one of the children had died and said the family was devastated. She also said the three children were receiving medical attention in hospital.
According to EWN, Booi said the babies’ mother and grandmother called her frantically on Thursday morning saying Bubele Mafenuka was ill and needed to get to a hospital urgently.
The publication reported that Bubele was declared dead at a local clinic after a neighbour rushed the child there.
After spending the day with the family, Booi said she left the family home just after 9pm on Wednesday evening with all four children playing happily.
“At 7am, I received a call again from the children’s grandmother who said Bubele is not well and, when I arrived, I saw this too – he looked pale and was not breathing normally,” said Booi.
After waiting for an ambulance for close to an hour, Booi said they enlisted the help of a neighbour who rushed Inga, the grandmother, and Bubele to the local clinic.
“I followed later in the morning and when I arrived, he was declared dead.
‘Their mother is devastated’
Now grieving their loss, the family is still fearful for Bubele’s sibling, Bungcwele.
The doctor at the local clinic in Khayelitsha requested to see all three, and when one looked fragile, the doctor insisted on keeping her.
“We’re waiting for the doctor to give us feedback on Bungcwele’s condition.
“Their mother is devastated,” added Booi.
Meanwhile, Bunono and Buchule are at home with their grandmother after being discharged.
The family will await results and a report back on investigations to determine what happened to little Bubele.
The children, Bubele, Buchule, Bunono and Bungcwele, celebrated their first birthday last month.
On July 10, KFM hosted the mother and her four children for their birthday celebration.
Community Chest donated R35,000 towards a bursary for Mafenuka’s studies, City Vision reported.
She is studying towards a national diploma in information technology.
– News24 wire
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.