Since its international market launch in 1995, the Mercedes-Benz Sprinter has offered outstanding handling, leading safety levels and unrivaled comfort.
With the third-generation Sprinter, this is taken to the next level, with a €2.5 billion (R40.7 billion) worldwide investment in its development, production network, sales, and after-sales support.
This Sprinter demonstrates the journey from purely a vehicle manufacturer into a provider of complete transport and mobility solutions. As part of its South African launch, the Sprinter is proving it can be 100% anything and everything to everyone. Configured as a panel van, people carrier or freight carrier, it offers a number of variants for countless industries.
These include taxi, trade, service and logistics, as well as other applications in the form of mobile homes and specialty conversions. This unmatched versatility means there is a sector-specific solution for any requirement, especially for new business owners.
It is available locally in a number of variants depending on body length, payload, cargo space, roof heights and equipment options. The variety of seating configurations offered also makes it easily the most versatile large van in the country. Maximum cargo volume is 15.5m3 , with a gross vehicle mass (GVM) of up to 5.5 tonnes.
The well-proven and trusted 2.2 litre, four-cylinder Mercedes-Benz OM651 diesel engine is once again called upon to deliver the power, performance and efficiency expected, with two output levels: 84kW and 120kW. The economical 84kW engine offers 300Nm of torque and is the perfect entry-level solution for the courier express and parcel segment.
The 120kW variant – with 380Nm of torque – benefits from an increase of 10kW, as compared with its predecessor. For more demanding applications, the three-litre, six-cylinder OM642 is the perfect engine. Delivering a punchy 140kW and 440Nm, it ensures there is not much the Sprinter cannot do. There are various customer segments and applications that pose various challenges and the Sprinter is always poised to provide a number of solutions.
With the new 3.49 tonne GVM Sprinter, the vehicle allows drivers with a Code 8/Code B licence to pilot the commercial vehicle. With the introduction of the new 3.49 tonne GVM Sprinter, Mercedes-Benz Vans is giving customers who previously could not drive this exceptional vehicle – due to licence or weight restrictions – a great transport and business solution. Pricing starts at R461 783 for the freight carrier and R501 448 for the panel van.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.