The inaugural Klawervlei Farm Sale Stakes took place at Durbanville on Saturday and horses trained by former champion Sean Tarry filled the first two positions.
Rock The Globe had run on well for second on his racecourse debut, and, despite a wide draw over the 1400m, went off as the 22-10 favourite.
The juvenile colt by Seventh Rock raced a couple of lengths off the pace set by stablemate and market rival Immeasurable, before taking over halfway up the straight and drawing off to win fluently by 2.50 lengths.
“He feels like the real deal and, given time, will be a smart type of horse,” said jockey Aldo Domeyer in his post-race interview. Domeyer had a very good day overall.
In addition to the main event, he was also successful on debutante Lana Belle in the third race and on Dynamite Jack in the last.
Lana Belle was particularly impressive, with the daughter of Grade 1 winner Trojan Belle cruising clear in the la er stages.
Warm favourite Boomps A Daisy was a big disappointment here, as she could only stay on for a well-beaten third. But you cannot keep a good man down and her trainer Brett Crawford bounced back with a couple of lightly raced horses winning – both ridden by Corne Orff er and both likely to prove worth following.
In Race 2, Finding Camelot made big improvement on his first run to wear down front-runner Lasata.“He’s crying out for a trip – 10 furlongs (2000m) plus – and is a lovely horse,” said Crawford.
Race 4 winner Scribner is a full brother to erstwhile champion Futura, but had been gelded and rested for more than six months following an unplaced debut.
The confidence was there as he was backed into 2-1 favourite in the 1250m Kuda Maiden Plate. He rewarded the support by running solidly to win going away.
It was not the strongest of fields, but Scribner won with authority and is sure to stay much further.“He’s had a lot of problems, and fractured a knee after his first run,” Crawford revealed.
“I’ve always thought a lot of him. He’s definitely going to go places if he stays sound,” was the verdict of his jockey.
Klawervlei Stud also hosted a highly successful seven-a-side football tournament at the race-course on the day. Trainer Eric Sands’ team were crowned champions. They defeated Maine Chance Farms on penalties in the final a er the match had ended scoreless.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.

								
								
								
																	Would you like to place a bet
										on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.