After South Africans were outraged on Saturday by reports that popular singer and poet Busiswa Gqulu, known artistically only as Busiswa or Busi, fell victim to a beating from ex-boyfriend DJ Katlego “Kaygee” Mlangeni, and his friend, while Busiswa’s friend was also allegedly attacked, the DJ offered his version of what happened.
Rapper friend Marc, real name Themba Kubheka, had earlier uploaded footage of his beaten-up face and damaged car following the alleged incident, and called for action to take place.
The news broke amid a week of outrage against the abuse and murder of women in South Africa, and while slain UCT student Uyinene Mrwetyana was being buried in East London.
In a Facebook post that has since been deleted, Kaygee denied assaulting Busiswa, but claimed he had caught her having sex with Marc, which he claimed was the cause of why he assaulted the rapper.
WATCH: Busiswa allegedly beaten by ex, with friend allegedly beaten for defending her
“I go in the house and it was unlocked and seems like they decided to do a quickie. So, I entered the bedroom and I caught them having sex on the same bed I sleep on every day.”
He then admitted to the physical fight with Marc.
Kubheka, however, denied to City Press that he had been having sex with Busiswa, and they’d merely been “talking”. He said Busiswa and Kaygee were not “officially together” in any case, and this would come out in court later.
He added that the DJ should not even have had access to the house since he wasn’t meant to be living with Busiswa “and no one let him him”.
Despite police spokesperson Captain Kay Makhubele being asked to confirm the details of the attack, he only responded to a query from City Press, acknowledging that a charge had been laid at the Midrand police station by Kubheka, but Mlangeni was yet to be arrested.
Marc had earlier explained in a Twitter thread that her ex-boyfriend had threatened Busi that if she went forward with the matter he would allegedly release sensitive information about her.


“Please help me find someone who can help,” said Marc.
In his thread, he relayed the details of what allegedly occurred.
“So guys today… I was attacked by Busiswa’s ex-boyfriend and baby daddy. This morning for the first time she was opening up about her abusive baby daddy. As we were having this discussion in her apartment … the guy managed to somehow get in, and he found me in the apartment with her and started attacking me.
“I tried to escape but he kept trying to grab me … along with his friend. At this point I am calling out for help and nobody is responding … so I rush outside while his friend is chasing me.
“His friend catches up with me and grabs me by the belt … as he attempts to beat me up … I am trying to call out for help while I’m blocking his punches. At that point they were arguing about who’s fetching the gun to shoot me.
“While this is happening outside, Kaygee is physically beating Busiswa in the parking lot while I’m fighting off the friend. Then as I get closer to the security gate, Kaygee grabs a fire extinguisher and starts smashing my car windows and tries to break the door.
“At this time Busiswa has managed to get herself in the house … but now it’s two against one … and security still not assisting. Finally after calling for help multiple times the security comes out and I ask him to call the police. He then tries to stop the attack but is unsuccessful and calls for backup … some how I manage to make it out side the complex but now I can’t run as it’s surrounded by a bush and the ex-boyfriend and friend have managed to knock my friend, who they found sleeping in the car, out.
“So they drive to the gate and tell the security to open. So they can attempt to shoot me. Somehow they get an exit code and they come for me. So I block as many punches and kicks as I can. Eventually they decide they’re going to fetch their gun and disappear.
“Security manages to put me in a secure location but Busi is in her apartment and scared. Finally the cops came and took statements. But I don’t fully trust the justice system,” said the rapper.
Busiswa, a singer-songwriter and poet from Mthatha, Eastern Cape, gained public recognition after featuring on DJ Zinhle’s song My Name Is after being discovered by Kalawa Jazmee’s CEO Oskido.
(Compiled by Charles Cilliers)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.