Become a subscriber to enjoy exclusive daily betting tips from horse racing experts. Flamingo Park  Best Bet Race 9 No 3 Queen Rachel History proves that thoroughbreds who relocate from the Highveld to Kimberley tend to flourish on the Flamingo Park sand, and hat-trick hopeful Queen Rachel is the perfect example. She has made light work of opposition in both starts at this venue. Most impressive about her most recent triumph was the fact she never looked in doubt despite giving the runner-up 3kg. Although Queen Rachel will have to concede 3kg to her biggest danger Rock To The Music...Become a subscriber to enjoy exclusive daily betting tips from horse racing experts.
Flamingo Park 
Best Bet
Race 9 No 3 Queen Rachel 
History proves that thoroughbreds who relocate from the Highveld to Kimberley tend to flourish on the Flamingo Park sand, and hat-trick hopeful Queen Rachel is the perfect example.
She has made light work of opposition in both starts at this venue.
Most impressive about her most recent triumph was the fact she never looked in doubt despite giving the runner-up 3kg. Although Queen Rachel will have to concede 3kg to her biggest danger Rock To The Music today, this contest will mark that rival’s handicap debut – against stronger company – so she is hard to recommend for the win.
Bargain Bet
Race 7 No 2 Concealed Secret
Although three-time winner, Concealed Secret, clearly doesn’t know the definition of consistency, he is not devoid of ability and a change of surface may do him the world of good.
He has also won on both the Turf and Polytrack so there is no reason why can’t win on the sand.
In Concealed Secret’s defense, he is seldom far from the action. In fact, over last three runs the furthest he has been beaten is 4.50 lengths. If he brings his best form to the course and is not too ring-rusty following the 97-day stint off the racetrack, he looks good value for money. Plus he has won over this distance.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.