The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) has released a statement confirming that party leader Julius Malema will report to the Hawks Office in Silverton, Pretoria, to give a warning statement relating to allegations that he discharged a firearm during the EFF’s fifth birthday celebrations in East London in 2018.
“Members of the media are invited” as Malema will be taking questions, the statement said.


A video emerged in August last year of Malema firing what looks like a high-powered automatic rifle into the air at his party’s fifth birthday celebration gathering in the Eastern Cape.
EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi claimed at the time that Malema had fired a toy gun.
There has been some confusion on what the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) plans to do regarding the firearm case.
The NPA confirmed last Thursday that a decision on whether to prosecute Malecma for discharging a firearm in public had actually not been taken.
“The NPA confirms that it is yet to take a decision whether or not to prosecute in the Malema matter in the Eastern Cape,” said NPA chief director of communications Bulelwa Makeke on Thursday evening.
On Thursday, News24 reported that the NPA had confirmed that a decision had been taken but that it could not make its decision public until it had communicated with Malema.
On Wednesday, NPA spokesperson in the Eastern Cape Luxolo Tyali confirmed that, while a decision had been made, it could not be revealed.
“A decision has been made but it has to be communicated with the two suspects before it can be shared with the public and media. We will issue a statement when the time is right,” said Tyali.
“At the moment, the matter is still in the hands of the investigating officer who is liaising with the suspects. As soon as he is done, we will issue a statement.”
READ MORE: Malema and Ndlozi to be prosecuted for assault of police officer
It was reported on Friday that the NPA planned to prosecute Malema as well as party spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi over another incident, in which the pair allegedly assaulted a police officer.
The case relates to an altercation in April last year that occurred at Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s funeral and follows ongoing pressure from Afrikaner lobby group AfriForum, which has threatened to prosecute the EFF members privately if no action occurs. They have threatened to do the same over the allegedly discharged firearm.
An NPA letter resolving that the pair will face a charge of common assault, which has been circulating on social media and was also reported on by EWN, has been confirmed as authentic by NPA spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane.
At the time of the funeral, there were reports of a scuffle between three senior EFF leaders and a police officer after they were allegedly denied entry into the Fourways Memorial Park, where the struggle stalwart was laid to rest. Malema reportedly said “no white person can stop me,” and was eventually granted entry.
He had his own protectors and full accreditation to be there, he claimed.
He later also denied that he had pushed anyone and strongly denied assaulting any VIP protection member.
Numerous images could, however, be seen on social media of Malema and Ndlozi surrounded by members of the army and police.
(Compiled by Daniel Friedman. Background reporting, Charles Cilliers)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.