The highly acclaimed Jaguar C-X75 concept is reportedly set to make its long awaited debut within the next few years, albeit as the replacement for the current F-Type.
Although it was reported last year that Jaguar had submitted a trademark application to the European Union’s Intellectual Property Office for the J-Type moniker that supposedly would replace the F-Type, Britain’s Autocar has now alleged that the shelved gas-turbine powered C-X75 will become the F-Type, complete with a mid-engine layout.
“There’s still a formula within Jaguar for a front-mid-engined car. I have a preference for mid-engined cars. It’s certainly something I would like to see,” former Jaguar Director of Design, Ian Callum, was quoted as saying.
In addition to the mid-engine layout, which confirms the J-Type claims, the publication also alleges that the F-Type could feature a hybrid drivetrain, which, according, to Callum, could influence the final look.
“For an electric sports car, you could make a shape like [the C-X75] with the batteries in a T or H-shape through the middle. Or you could make it as a longitudinal internal-combustion mid-engined car. It would be short enough. So the style won’t dictate the drivetrain, but the drivetrain may dictate the style,” he said.
While the next F-Type is only expected to enter production in three years’ time, the lack of a suitable platform could be the biggest hindrance as the current model’s all-aluminium D6a architecture was born out of the X150, the internal moniker for the second generation XK that the F-Type replaced in 2013.
At present, it would therefore seem that Jaguar’s recent partnership signing with BMW could result in the F-Type using one of Munich’s platform, especially as the rumoured hybrid switch will work in favour of the next i8 that is expected to become an all-electric model.
Another likely platform is Jaguar’s own D7 used in a variety of models such as the I-Pace (D7e), F-Pace, XE and XF (D7a), though this looks set to be curbed as extensive re-engineering would be required in order for it to be deemed suitable. Coventry’s recent financial quarter slump of £396-million (R7 314 390 139) is however likely to infringe on the platform’s re-developing, meaning that the F-Type, which will have its engines supplied by Munich according to reports, will also have German underpinnings in an attempt to cut costs.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.