If you missed your chance to see the Springboks play live in Japan, you can still rally family and friends for a mini getaway to catch all of the live 2019 Rugby World Cup action.
Kick-off is September 20, and the final match of the tournament is scheduled for November 2.
Here are a few of our top-choice getaways where the screens are HD, the beer is ice-cold, and the surrounding views remind us what a lekker country South Africa really is.
The Blue Marlin Hotel, Scottburgh, KwaZulu Natal
You can’t go wrong with the iconic South Coast to catch this year’s tournament. With 110 rooms (all with sea-views) the Blue Marlin Hotel can easily accommodate large groups. When not glued to the TV screens, sprawl out on the sand with a good book, or hit the water with the kids. Besides being a top surf location, fishing, snorkelling, scuba diving is also good here. Play a game of touch rugby on the beach or head to the outside bar to top up on something crisp and cold after a game.
Piekenierskloof Mountain Resort, Cedarberg, Western Cape
This low-key accommodation is the perfect meeting place for rugby-loving locals. Claim your spot at the main bar and bask in rugby fever, or kick back in your air-conditioned room and watch the action on your private flat-screen TV. Between games, enjoy delicious buffet-style dinners, organised activities for the kids, and two pools (one indoor and heated). Anything you need can be sent straight to your sun lounger!
Mount Savannah, Cradle of Humankind, Gauteng
Mount Savannah is your home away from home and less than 45 minutes’ drive from central Gauteng and Pretoria. It’s a top-notch, affordable option for families wanting to unwind and re-connect, amble out on game drives or watch a few matches that will be broadcast in the lounge area. Mount Savannah will win most South Africans over because it offers braai facilities. There’s nothing better than lighting up the coals while waiting for the game to start. Keep an eye out for some of the locals, like kudu, red hartebeest or zebra. You might even be lucky enough to spot a real springbok!
The Peninsula All-Suite Hotel, Cape Town, Western Cape
Whether you’re in town on business or want to be in the pulsating heart of the Mother City during the tournament, the Peninsula-All-Suite Hotel in Sea Point is the place to check-in. If you enjoy watching the game with friends, but not the crowds, you’ll love their Faces cocktail bar and on-site Strolla Restaurant. When not glued to the screen, go for a scenic walk along the promenade, or hit the Cape Peninsula or Winelands for the day. If you’re in the mood to rub shoulders at a local watering hole, catch an Uber to Fireman’s Arms. The legendary, nautical-themed, English pub is kitted with nine 46” screens and two projectors.
Little Switzerland Resort, The Drakensberg, KwaZulu Natal
The stage is set at this Alpine-Resort in the Drakensberg with its back-to-nature atmosphere, incredible mountain trails and warm hospitality. Between games, hike to your heart’s content. And, if you’re a 4×4 fanatic, you’ll love taking on Sani Pass along the border of Lesotho. The bar area is proper English pub-style with a fireplace and a variety of local beers on tap. It’s the perfect place to back the Bokke and enjoy the start of the 2019 Rugby World Cup. This resort also now offers two pet-friendly chalets so you can even bring your little mascots along for the ride.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.