The Zwartkops Raceway near Pretoria will offer patrons a wide, varied and spectacular motorsport mix this Saturday, with the Historic and Inland four wheel racing categories joining forces. No fewer than 23 races will accommodate 12 separate competition disciplines on the day.
Heading up the historical side of the programme will be two races for SKF Pre-1966 Legend Saloons and Sports Cars. The Legend V8 class will be led by Lee Thompson (Chevrolet Chevelle), Hennie Groenewald (SP Mercury Comet), Jonathan du Toit (TAR Chevrolet Nova) and Mark du Toit (TAR Ford Fairlane).
Behind them, the ‘under two-litre class’ will see top entrants like Carel Pienaar (Lotus Cortina), Vic Campher (Tom Campher Volvo 122S), Roger Houston (CTR Alfa Romeo Giulia), Jody Robertson (BMW 2002 Ti), and Alan Poulter (Tom Campher Volvo 122S).
The Little Giant class will feature Ismael Baloyi (TAR GSM Dart), Josh Dovey (Austin Healy Sprite), Kassie Coetzee (Tom Campher Volvo P1800), Terrence Khalo (TAR GSM Dart), Robbie Frank (Lotus 23), Chad Ten Doeschate (Alfa Romeo Sprint) and Stephen Britz (MGB Roadster).
Probable winners in the races for Pre-1974 International Sports Prototypes, Pre 1990 Sports and GT cars must include Hennie Groenewald (SP Chevrolet Camaro), Mark du Toit TAR Lola T70 Spyder), Jonathan du Toit (TAR Chevron B8), George Avvakoumides (Ocean Basket Porsche 911 RSR) and Peter Bailey (Porsche 911 RSR).
MODERN. Heading up the modern side of the programmewill be races for the Bridgestone BMW brigade, with with a front-runner expected to be PauloLoureiro (Combined BMW 335i). Pictures: RacePics
The races for Universal Health Pre-1980 Saloon Cars could be won by drivers like Mario Rossi (FAS Alfa Romeo GTV6), Sophos Pantazis (Datsun 240Z), Jannie van Rooyen (VW Scirocco) and Johann Smith (SPS Mazda Capella).
Topping the Midvaal Historic entry list are people like Bjorn Gebert (FAS Alfa GTV6), Deon van Vuuren (Hoosier Mazda R100 Rotary), Brendon Parker (Blitz Datsun GX Coupe), Travis Jensen (Jensen Towing Datsun), Martin Botha (Climax Datsun Coupe), Ken Price (SV Tech Toyota Corolla SR5), Ian Kilburn (Datsun GX Coupe) and Rene van Rensburg (SV Tech Ford Escort).
The Formula Monoposto races should see front-runners like David Jermy (Beauty Factory Van Diemen), Jeff Gable (Expensive Habits Van Diemen), Hylton Morrow (Chaplins Formula M), Carel van Heerden (Swift 91), Louis van der Merwe ((Swift 91) and Gary Everleigh (Formula M).
The day’s biggest entry will be provided by the Charlies Superspar Historic Pursuit category, with 26 cars taking to the tarmac. Top contenders should include Kobus Brits (Datsun SSS), Johan Steenkamp (Porsche 924), Kola de Klerk (Nissan 300Z) and Werner Hartzenberg (Porsche 928).
Heading up the modern half of the programme will be two Bridgestone BMW Car Club races, with frontrunners expected to be Paulo Loureiro (Combined BMW 335i), David Coetzee (ELKSA BMW M3) and Rick Loureiro (Combined BMW F30).
The Motul Clubmans races will see frontrunners like Marius Jacobs (AAA Recovery Tigra), Riaan Draper (Classic Auto Peugeot), Ishmael Peck (National Hotrods Honda Civic), Dewald Brummer (MAD VW Golf Turbo) and Stefan Snyders (Porsche 911).
The National Sports Car Challenge races will be contested by people like Fritz Kleynhans (Ligier JS53), Klippies Krige (Lotus 7), Adriaan le Roux (Caterham 7), Dean Wolson (Wright Sports 2000) and James Forbes (Nash MVW3).
Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Lotus 7) must be the man to beat in the Lotus Challenge races, chased by people like Thomas Falkiner (Adaptive Resources Taylon 7), Mackie Adlem (Adlem Auto Birkin) and Clive Wilmot (Birkin).
Rounding out the day will be three races for Liqui Moly Inex Legends, with frontrunners to include Willie Erasmus, Johann van der Venter and Carl Roux.
The Zwartkops gates will be open from 6am, with qualifying sessions in the early morning. Racing will commence at 9.30am. Everybody is invited to visit the pits on foot at any time, with the Zwartkops Mini Moke trains running between the pit gate and grandstands all day.
Food and drink will be on sale or you may take your own. Admission will cost R100 per adult and R80 per student, while children under the age of 12 get in free. For more information, call the Zwartkops office at 012 384 2299.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.