The 2019 national Extreme Festival will perform at the Western Cape Killarney circuit on Saturday, with all five of the involved racing disciplines in action.
Heading up the racing show will be two races for Global Touring Cars. Going to Cape Town, Keagan Masters will lead the drivers’ championship in his works Volkswagen Motorsport Jetta.
He will be the man to beat, with his closest challengers Simon Moss (All Power Audi), Johan Fourie (EPS Couriers BMW), Daniel Rowe (Volkswagen Motorsport Jetta), Michael van Rooyen (Gazoo Toyota Corolla), Tschops Sipuka (All Power Audi) and Robert Wolk (Chemical Logistics BMW).
Bradley Liebenberg (Volkswagen Motorsport Golf GTI) leads the GTC2 title chase and he will start as victory favourite, chased by people like Adrian Wood (Kyocera Golf GTI), Charl Smalberger (Universal Health Golf GTI) and Paul Hill (Kalex Golf GTI).
TIGHT STUFF. The Falken Polo Cup races should provide ultra close competition, with Keegan Campos (CamposTransport Polo) one of the podium challengers.
The day’s closest racing should be provided by the Falken Polo Cup brigade, with 25 cars entered. Top title contestants Bradley Liebenberg (Hello Mobile Polo) and Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Polo) will continue their season-long battle, with various other drivers possibly in the mix.
They will include Keegan Campos (Campos Transport Polo), Chris Shorter (AE Polo), Jurie Swart (G- Energy Polo), Clinton Bezuidenhout (Glyco Engine Polo), Matt Shorter (Monroe Polo), Jason Campos (Turn 1 Polo), Dario Busi (Upstream Connect Polo) and Jonathan Mogotsi (VW Motorsport Polo).
Already crowned 2019 champion Scott Temple (Road to Race Mygale) should be the man to beat in the Investchem Formula 1600 races, with his closest adversaries Julian van der Watt (Investchem Mygale), Nicholas Van Weely (Magnificent Paints Van Diemen), Tiago Rebelo (TRMS Mygale), Andrew Schofield (Investchem Mygale), Andrew Rackstraw (RDSA Mygale), Siyabonga Mankonkwana (Cervinia Mygale) and Alex Gillespie (ERP Trucking Mygale).
Two-wheeler enthusiasts will not be left out in the cold. Topping that part of the programme will be races for the SA Superbike category, with Steven Odendaal (Petra Yamaha R1), Clinton Seller (King Price Yamaha R1), Lance Isaacs (Supabets BMW S1000RR), David Mc Fadden (RPM Centre Yamaha R1), Hayden Jonas (WP Motors Yamaha R1) and Ronald Slamet (PLM Yamaha R1) all likely podium chasers.
Blaze Baker (JRB Yamaha R6) will be the 600 Supersport favourite, chased by Jared Schultz (ASAP World Yamaha R6), Kewyn Snyman (Yamaha R6) and Brett Roberts (Lights by Lines Yamaha R6).
Graeme van Breda (Stefanutti Stocks ZX10) will be the favourite to win the Red Square Kawasaki Masters races, chased by people like Johan le Roux (Kawasaki ZX10), Kyle Robinson (Fantech ZX10), Jaco Gous (Kawasaki ZX10), Gareth Jackson (Morphine ZX10), Ruaan Oberholzer (Kawasaki ZX10) and Dale Nieuwenhuizen (Fantech ZX10).
Front-runners in the Bridgestone Superbike races must include Hein McMahon (BDJ Freight BMW S1000RR), Harry Timmerman (BMW HP4), Etienne Nelson (Cabac BMW S1000RR), Byron Rothquel (Mag Magic BMW S1000RR) and Lubabalo Ntisana (LB Auto Kawasaki).
Rounding out the programme will be races for the local Mikes Place Clubmans Saloon car brigade, with top contenders on the 41-strong entry list Clint Rennart (Speed Precision VW Golf Turbo), Danie van Niekerk (Wingfield BMW 325i), Rafiek Pather (LVTS BMW E46), Riaan Swart (A1 Gutters VW Jetta Turbo), Cody Alberts (Alfaholic BMW 330) and Kosie Swanepoel (D & E Steel Toyota Lexus).
The Killarney gates will be open from 7.30am, with racing scheduled to start at 10am. Admission will cost R100 per adult and R40 per student, with kids under the age of 12 going in for free.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.