The mass exodus of promising junior rugby players out of South Africa has begun.
No less than 18 school players of 2019 will play abroad next year.
This will only cause the number of Saffas playing rugby abroad and representing other countries to continue accumulating in near future.
More than 300 South Africans are already earning a living by plying their trade overseas.
The new contracting system introduced by SA Rugby that is supposed to keep more rugby players in the country seems to be having an opposite impact on tomorrow’s talent.
The fact that there will only be a week-long u-19 tournament from this year onwards as well as the fact that the only junior interprovincial tournament after school will be u-21 and not u-20 will without a doubt also influence players’ decision to leave the country.
Kade Wolhurter’s case is arguably the most high-profile.
The Paul Roos Gimnasium flyhalf was undoubtedly the best player in action during this year’s Craven Week in Bloemfontein.
However, Wolhurter was overlooked for SA Schools selection because of his indication that he’ll be furthering his career in France at Montpellier.
SA Rugby’s strategic transformation plan has also had an impact.
Just more than 30 players were handed junior contracts by unions for 2020.
This is a lot less than the approximately 105 players whom made junior agreements at the end of 2018.
Wolhurter will be joined by Marcell Muller (wing, Grey College), Robbie Rodgers (prop, Paul Roos), Lesley Botha (No 8, Grey College) and Sergio Moreira (lock, Noordheuwel) at Montpellier. Rodgers is the son of former Springbok prop Heinrich.
Like Wolhurter, FC du Plessis (Toulon) was overlooked for SA Schools selection, yet several others somehow eluded SA Rugby’s policing and still managed to represent the national side during this year’s AON international series.
Du Plessis was one of the standout flyhalves in South Africa this season and helped Grey College finish at the top of several school team rankings.
SA School fullback Zeiling Strydom started all three matches of the international series, but will be calling for the ball in French after joining Stade Francais in Paris.
Joining him is Affies’ tighthead prop, Werner Kruger, while Wit Bulle captain and hooker, Jacques-Lois du Toit, is also in advanced discussions with the club.
Another two SA Schools players, Jan-Hendrik Wessels (prop, Grey College) and George Cronje (No 8, Grey College), haven’t put pen to paper yet, but have received lucrative offers from French clubs and could be lost to local rugby.
Their agent, BC du Plessis, confirmed that they have a couple of offers from overseas as well as local.
They haven’t made a final decision.
Paarl Gimnasium’s Pierich Siebert (flank) and Stephan du Toit (centre) will be leaving South Africa to further their careers in Japan.
Alex Groves, the St John’s College lock who represented the Golden Lions XV at the Craven Week, will leave to join English club Bristol.
St Andrew’s College of Grahamstown’s hooker, Chris Poole, will further his career at Irish giants Ulster.
Both already possess British passports, which made their moves easier.
Voortrekker of Bethlehem’s Steyl Barnard will join Beziers in France and Jarryd Scheepers (lock, Garsfontein) is attending university in Australia.
This article was first appeared on School of Rugby. It is republished here with permission.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.