The experience of Francois Louw trumped the X-factor of Kwagga Smith as the Springboks named a predictable match-23 for Saturday’s World Cup opener against the All Blacks in Yokohama.
In all honesty, no-one expected national coach Rassie Erasmus to tinker with the squad that clinically disposed of Japan 41-7 a fortnight ago.
“We’ve found some consistency and some momentum in a number of ways this season,” he said.
“One of them is in selection. We have 31 players in the squad, any of whom I would be happy to select – as well as standby players back home – but this is a line-up that has worked well as a starting combination and one with real momentum to come from the bench.
“They have emerged together over the past 18 months as our game has developed and matured. We’re continuing to develop and new players are always pushing a claim but we’ve prepared well and we’re looking forward to what will be another extremely close match.”
However, there had been some observers who did punt the value of perhaps trying something different by employing the Lions star given his pedigree as a superb sevens player and the fact that international matches invariably become looser in the last 15 minutes.
Smith though, without disgracing himself, didn’t quite impose himself physically in previous appearances this season to date.
It’s a risk Erasmus seemingly wasn’t willing to take, instead continuing to trust the 69-Test, 34-year-old Louw’s continued excellence at the breakdown.
Another notable development is the palpable relief that replacement tighthead Trevor Nyakane has been declared fit after suffering a knee injury against Japan.
The Bulls stalwart has been in outstanding form in 2019 and has become a vital cog in the Boks’ engine room, be it as a starter or impact player.
Duane Vermeulen’s service is also rewarded with a highly appropriate 50th Test cap – against New Zealand at a World Cup.
Erasmus expects another thrillingly tight encounter.
“Our last three matches have ended in stalemate, one win each and a draw, for an aggregate score of 82-82,” he said.
“You couldn’t say there is a favourite. I think we have a healthy respect for each other’s capabilities but it will come down to a small moment to decide a big game in the end, I suppose.”
Springboks: Willie le Roux, Cheslin Kolbe, Lukhanyo Am, Damian de Allende, Makazole Mapimpi, Handre Pollard, Faf de Klerk, Duane Vermeulen, Pieter-Steph du Toit, Siya Kolisi (c), Franco Mostert, Eben Etzebeth, Frans Malherbe, Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff. Bench: Bongi Mbonambi, Beast Mtawarira, Trevor Nyakane, RG Snyman, Francois Louw, Herschel Jantjies, Frans Steyn, Jesse Kriel.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.