A clip from 24-hour news channel Newzroom Afrika that was picked up by, among others, Sizwe Dhlomo, appears to show EWN journalist Barry Bateman shaking his head somewhat in disbelief at what he just heard being said by EFF leader Julius Malema outside the Hawks’ offices.
It was later confirmed that Bateman had called Malema a “p**s”, and EWN felt the need to issue an apology about it.


Malema had appeared for a warning statement this morning related to charges that include the illegal discharging of a firearm.
In the clip, Malema can be seen looking Bateman in the eye, in answer to whether Malema had assaulted a white policeman at the funeral of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela last year – as the Hawks appear keen to charge him for – and he replies: “I wish I did that. I wish I’d assaulted him. Now that it’s a real issue, I wish I did a real thing. Proper. I regret not doing it. I should have done it.”
Malema apparently then refers to Bateman as “Boet”, and tells him he isn’t scared. “Uniform or no uniform. Afrikaner or no Afrikaner. White or pink! I deal with you! Decisively,” he says, before thanking the gathered media and leaving.
Bateman can then be seen shaking his head and apparently muttering the slur, “P**s!”
Dhlomo wanted to know if he was “reading [Bateman’s] lips wrong?” but many people on Twitter immediately chimed in that he wasn’t.






Earlier, Malema had said he and his party would not respond to the latest charges from the Hawks until they were charged formally and in court.
He accused the Hawks of being mischievous and said the party would deal with the allegations on the appropriate platforms and subject themselves to the processes of the law.
“If they want to charge, they must charge. We’ll speak in court. We don’t think there is anything to answer to. I don’t know why they are being dramatic.”
He publicly denied all the five allegations against him, however.
Malema went on to also repudiate reports that the EFF spent R500,000 at the Durban July this year. He said his brother had a marquee that sold drinks and tickets to make a profit.
On allegations that he lives opulently, he maintained that he has always worn luxury brands such as Louis Vuitton and Gucci, since when Debora Patta – who also made accusations about it – was a journalist.




(Compiled by Charles Cilliers)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.