The prospect of the Toyota Tundra becoming available in right-hand-drive (RHD) has taken another step forward with reports from Australia alleging that company executives Down Under are in talks with Japan to make it a reality.
In June, Toyota Australia Vice-President of Sales and Marketing, Sean Hanley, told caradvice.com.au that a feasibility study had been commissioned to establish the viability of bringing not only the Tundra, but also the smaller Tacoma to market with the steering wheel on the right side.
“We’re constantly interested in it so… you know, we have no, no confirmed plans at all to announce today but it’s something we continue to study. Market size, and trends in the future, all these things are deeply important, you know, CO2 considerations going forward are deeply important,” he said.
In the latest report, whichcar.com.au claims that the talks are not only including the Tundra, but also the eight-seat Sequoia that rivals the likes of the Nissan Patrol, BMW X7, Mercedes-Benz GLS and, in North America, the Chevrolet Suburban and Ford Expedition.
The introduction of the Tundra will see it competing against the Chevrolet Silverado and Ram 1500/2500, which are converted by Walkinshaw Automotive in Melbourne under the Holden Special Vehicles and American Special Vehicles banner with full backing from General Motors and Fiat-Chrysler Automobiles (FCA).
Competition will also come from of the Nissan Titan which is reportedly under consideration for a third-party conversion with the approval of Nissan Japan.
Like the Tundra, the Sequoia is only available with a petrol engine in North America, a 5.7-litre V8 that produces 284kW/544Nm sent to the rear or all four wheels via a six-speed automatic gearbox.
Despite Toyota Australia dropping the one-step below petrol powered Land Cruiser 200 earlier this month due to poor sales, both the Sequoia and Tundra are closely related to outgoing 200, meaning the potential inclusion of the 4.5 D-4D V8 engine in place of bent-eight petrol. At present though, this is purely speculative.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.