2019 continues to be a year where Schalk Brits breaks new ground.
The 38-year-old previously had already become the Springboks’ second oldest skipper in history, a feat he’ll repeat in a World Cup context when the national rugby team takes on Namibia in Toyota on Saturday.
But the really eye-catching development is that Brits will lead the troops out with No 8 on his back.
There had been a lot of speculation in the build-up to the tournament that the veteran’s explosiveness could easily lead to him moving to the back of the scrum instead of in front.
Coach Rassie Erasmus confirmed that on Wednesday morning (SA time).
The backline has an exciting look to it, with the Jantjies duo of Elton and Herschel rekindling a partnership that looked promising against the Wallabies in the Rugby Championship, while Warrick Gelant, S’bu Nkosi make their debuts in the showpiece tournament.
Frans Steyn will also be keen to challenge for a starting spot in the “first team” after being an unused sub last weekend against the All Blacks.
Most of the fringe players in the pack have been given an opportunity, but it is revealing that regular skipper Siya Kolisi is also on the bench.
It suggests he hasn’t quite yet reached a desired level of match fitness and could do with about 20-30 minutes’ game-time in what is expected to be a less demanding on-field environment.
Typical of Erasmus’ meticulousness, he’s also given himself the insurance policy of his best backs against New Zealand – Damian de Allende and Cheslin Kolbe – being present on the bench should he need them.
“There’s a good blend of serious experience and serious talent in this line up and I’m looking forward to seeing them perform,” said Erasmus.
“This is a Springbok team that is hungry to play and show what they can do and the majority of them have had the chance to play as a combination together a couple of times this season.”
But there’s undoubtedly also a bit of pressure on the combination.
“Every match is a must-win game for us now and we are treating this match with the same level of preparation as we did New Zealand last week.
“They’ve got an important job to do: you always lose momentum in a defeat and we need to regain that with a victory and a strong performance,” said Erasmus.
Springboks: Warrick Gelant, S’bu Nkosi, Lukhanyo Am, Frans Steyn, Makazole Mapimpi, Elton Jantjies, Herschel Jantjies, Schalk Brits (c), Francois Louw, Kwagga Smith, Lood de Jager, RG Snyman, Vince Koch, Bongi Mbonambi, Beast Mtawarira. Bench: Steven Kitshoff, Thomas du Toit, Eben Etzebeth, Siya Kolisi, Franco Mostert, Cobus Reinach, Damian de Allende, Cheslin Kolbe.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.