As expected, next year’s much-publicised “Match in Africa” tennis exhibition between Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal in Cape Town elicited huge demand for tickets.
What South African tennis fans didn’t bank on though is that all seats would be sold out within ten minutes!
Tickets, priced from R150 to R1 950, were on sale on Computicket as well as at Computicket and Shoprite stores.

SOLD OUT – Due to high demand, tickets for the much-anticipated Roger Federer vs Rafael Nadal 'The Match in Africa for the benefit of the Roger Federer Foundation’ are sold out. Tickets sold out in just over 10 minutes. 
In store tickets that were available, are also sold out. pic.twitter.com/h6nYoCzLt4
— Computicket (@Computicket) September 4, 2019

A maximum of six tickets each were allowed per purchase, but a legion of fans weren’t able to get their hands on any.
“Due to high demand, tickets for the much-anticipated Roger Federer vs Rafael Nadal ‘The Match in Africa for the benefit of the Roger Federer Foundation’ are sold out,” Computicket tweeted.
“Tickets sold out in just over 10 minutes. In store tickets that were available, are also sold out.”
Needless to say, many fans weren’t chuffed and took to social media to vent their frustration.

All tickets sold out for #MatchInAfrica. I sat with multiple devices open from 8:30 and didn’t even get the chance to buy one! Honestly though, you can’t trust @Computicket after their track record with big events and ticket “sales”.
— Todd Wade (@MyNamesTodd) September 4, 2019


@rogerfederer The Match in Africa SOLD OUT in less than 15 minutes.  If you arranged outside viewing area too (like grass bank at Wimbledon) you could get even bigger attendance record.  Please help! Desperate fan
— Bronwen Reynolds (@BronwenReynolds) September 4, 2019


@rogerfederer..So Roger….even at the back of your loss in NY…tickets to the Match in Africa sold out in 10 minutes and many legit tennis players have no tickets. Please consider playing  another match and doubling up on the proceeds. That will sell out in same time…
— Teresa Kruger (@TeresaK296) September 4, 2019


Hi Computicket, explain touts absolutely smoking desperate fans on Viagogo seconds after tickets ‘sold out’ @rogerfederer @RafaelNadal #matchinafrica pic.twitter.com/u0BlCijXPy
— Malherbe Pelser (@malherbepelser) September 4, 2019


@Computicket How can the tickets to the Roger Federer/Rafael Nadal The Match in Africa be sold out before they've gone on sale! There are disappointed fans across the country I'm sure.
— Forts and Fairies (@LisaTrollip) September 4, 2019


#epicfail got onto computicket and clicked book at 9:00 sharp and waited in waiting line for 18 min and then was kick out and said sold out #matchinafrica #ridculous
— luke (@luke78270243) September 4, 2019


So @Computicket claims that @RafaelNadal and @rogerfederer broke the world record in under 10 min? Lol. Completely impossible to sell 50 000 tickets in 10 min considering how slow their systems are. Can someone give us answers?#MatchinAfrica
— Woke RSA (@Woke_RSA) September 4, 2019


@rogerfederer Hi sir, please could you arrange an extra day for Match for Africa 6…..tickets sold out in 10 minutes. We had NO chance getting our hands on them. ???????? Thousands of people are very sad.
— Martin Nel (@martypaarl) September 4, 2019


There’s no way 50,000 tickets are all sold within 15mins of sells opening, please be ethical @Computicket #MatchInAfrica
— MoCylinder (@MoCylinder) September 4, 2019

For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.