Another suspect is expected to be arrested soon in a case about a 2016 Westbury gang-related murder, the Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg heard on Friday.
As a result, pre-trial proceedings in the case, involving alleged Varados gang leader Leroy “Finch” Brown and his co-accused, Christopher “Pitso” Charles and Sophiatown-based police officer Warrant Officer Wynand Steyn, were moved from the Johannesburg Magistrates’ Court to the high court.
Brown, Charles and Steyn are accused of the murder of Reagan Jacobs at Agatha flats in Newclare on April 21, 2016.
The Varados gang is a Fast Guns rival. The alleged leader of the Fast Guns is Keenan Sheldon Ebrahim, who is also on trial in the High Court along with nine others for the murder of Bradley Sauls on July 24, 2018, in Westbury.
Making their first appearance in the High Court on Friday, the accused appeared calm as they sat in the dock, waiting for their case to be called. When it was their turn to step into the dock, they suddenly looked confused about what to do.
They are out on bail.
The state informed the court that investigations in the matter were still not complete because another suspect could be arrested soon.
The case kicked off earlier this year after the arrest of Brown and Charles. Days later, Steyn was also arrested for his involvement.
According to the indictment, it is alleged that on April 21, Steyn, Brown, and Charles were travelling in a marked police vehicle when Brown and Charles jumped out, opened fire and killed Jacobs at Agatha flats in Newclare. It emerged during the bail hearing that a police reservist stationed at the Sophiatown police station was also present in the vehicle.
Two people who were with Jacobs were injured in the incident.
During the bail hearing, investigating officer, Warrant Officer Vincent Saunders, testified that witnesses had alleged that Steyn was the driver of the police BMW believed to have been used in the crime.
Among the witnesses is someone who survived the shooting.
Arguing for his release on bail, Steyn said that he was not working on the day and that the BMW was nowhere near Newclare because it had been parked in Alberton.
Brown’s pre-trial proceedings are expected to resume on Friday, October 11, and Ebrahim returns to court for pre-trial proceedings on September 20.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.