Twenty20 superstar Chris Gayle is only going to be available for the Jozi Stars for the first six games of this year’s Mzansi Super League, but this could be offset by England’s World Cup winner Jonny Bairstow being keen to play in the South African T20 competition that gets underway on November 8.
Limited-overs star Bairstow was dropped from England’s Test squad for their November tour of New Zealand this week and this led him to immediately get hold of Cricket South Africa (CSA) and inquire about the possibilities of playing in the MSL.
“Jonny immediately contacted us asking if there might be an opportunity for him to play in the MSL. Obviously we will try and get him in, although our plan is for the internationals to play all the way through and they have confirmed their availability from November 8. But Gayle is the only marquee player only partially available, but now he can be replaced,” CSA acting director of cricket Corrie van Zyl said.
The final part of the process of deciding the team rosters was completed on Wednesday with the wildcard picks for the six teams being announced.
Proteas Dane Paterson (Jozi Stars) and Robbie Frylinck (Durban Heat) were finally contracted and it would have been incredible for them not to have been involved seeing as though they have made their names with their white-ball skills.
Thando Ntini of South Africa during the 6th One Day match between South Africa Emerging and Sri Lanka Emerging at Tuks Oval on July 06, 2019 in Pretoria, South Africa. (Photo by Lee Warren/Gallo Images)
Paarl Rocks chose Thando Ntini, the son of fast bowling great Makhaya, while the Nelson Mandela Bay Giants added a back-up leg-spinner to Imran Tahir in Easterns prospect Dyllan Matthews, who played an integral part in their CSA Provincial T20 triumph, and Cape Town Blitz signed left-arm quick Khwezi Gumede, also from Easterns.
The Tshwane Spartans went a different route and gave their wildcard and rookie place to Donovan Ferreira, the big-hitting all-rounder who helped the Tuks to their fourth Varsity Cup title in five years earlier this month.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.