When Benhard Janse van Rensburg made the trek to Bloemfontein in mid-2018, there were undoubtedly some observers who furrowed their brows.
The then 21-year-old, after arriving at the Sharks in 2016 to much fanfare, was already in a rut.
A lack of game-time and a severe lack of confidence made Robert du Preez, the Durbanites’ mentor, look like a bit of a fool, who waxed lyrical about Janse van Rensburg.
“I’m confident in Benhard’s game management. He’s a really good communicator and that’s pivotal in his position. Benhard’s a brilliant defender in his channel as well,” Du Preez said in early 2017 after handing him an unexpected Super Rugby debut at flyhalf.
The fall was quicker than the rise.
The youngster looked overawed and was swiftly loaned out to the Southern Kings for their first Pro14 campaign, making a depressing five appearances out of 21.
For some reason (at least at that stage), the Cheetahs came knocking.
“We actually signed him as a backup flyhalf,” said MJ Smith, the franchise’s high performance manager.
“That was his position, but we also felt he could cover No 12 for us.”
But Smith’s brother and outgoing Cheetahs coach, Franco, thought typically out-of-the-box in trying to determine why Janse van Rensburg wasn’t making an impact.
“During last year’s SuperSport Rugby Challenge, Franco had the idea of Benhard switching to outside centre, exactly because he has the game-breaking skills of a flyhalf,” said MJ.
“Ironically, that skill and vision has become very important, because Benhard is possibly not quite quick enough for the No 13 jersey. Yet he’s proven he is pacy enough, he’s very strong and he can make good decisions in the outside channels. In the end, it’s made him a brilliant signing. He’s proved himself as a key player, particularly for our campaign up North.”
Janse van Rensburg was indeed outstanding in Free State’s Currie Cup-winning campaign, consistently terrorising defences while also not neglecting his defensive duties.
In fact, he’s grown to the extent that one’s really excited now to see how he handles the step-up that is this year’s Pro14, which commences on 27 September.
“His case proves that once you get an opportunity and you get backed by coaches, you just naturally develop,” said MJ Smith.
“That’s what we do at the Cheetahs. He’s a perfect example.”
Stean Pienaar of Golden Lions and Joseph Dweba of Toyota Cheetahs during the Currie Cup, Final match between Toyota Free State XV and Xerox Golden Lions XV at Toyota Stadium on September 07, 2019 in Bloemfontein, South Africa. (Photo by Frikkie Kapp/Gallo Images)
In the bigger scheme of things, Janse van Rensburg’s rise, as well as that of hooker Joseph Dweba, prop Ox Nche and No 8 Henco Venter, is creating a new dynamic in local rugby.
Suddenly, Springbok coach Rassie Erasmus really can’t ignore the claims of local stars in the Pro14 (and lesser extent Currie Cup)  – a perception created by the fact that only Nche and returning captain Oupa Mohoje have played at international level since 2018.
“We had an discussion with Rassie and we asked: ‘You’re not really interested in our players. Why?’,” said Harold Verster, the Cheetahs’ MD.
“He said: ‘If guys win games and perform well‚ they’ll definitely get picked. If you look at the pony system where they award ponies to up and coming players. You’ve won the Currie Cup and there’s players we need to look at’. If we win and we perform well‚ our players will go through to the Springboks.”
MJ Smith is probably a tad more diplomatic about the matter.
“It’s always a point to debate‚ but I do believe if we’re successful in the Pro14‚ we will have players selected from the Cheetahs. To constantly be in the top seven or six and taking part in the play-offs means the eyes will turn towards us,” he said.
“Rassie has indicated that there’s level ground between Super Rugby and the Pro14. It’s up to us that we get into the semifinals and we’ll be favoured from a selection perspective.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.