Given that he was World Rugby’s international rookie-of-the-year in 2018, it was only a matter of time before Aphiwe Dyantyi would creep into World Cup conversations.
And the unfortunate individual who had to front up was Springbok assistant coach Matt Proudfoot, who on Tuesday denied that the suspended winger had tarnished South African rugby’s image going into the tournament.
Dyantyi is currently contesting a serious doping charge, where both A- and B-samples tested positive for multiple anabolic steroids, which could lead to a four-year ban.
“I think that the image of South African rugby is on the field,” said Proudfoot, ahead of the Boks’ tournament opener against the All Blacks in Yokohama on Saturday.
“We’re a competitive nation. If you look at our Sevens side, the juniors, the Women’s team, and the Boks, that success is the image of South African rugby that needs to be attained.
ALSO READ: Faf won’t be having a bad hair day against the All Blacks
“(Regarding local rugby’s reputation) I’m a forwards coach, mate. That’s something for the administrators to answer. I don’t have the information to answer that.”
Proudfoot certainly isn’t taking the matter lightly though.
“Doping in sport – and not just in rugby – needs to be continuously addressed worldwide. To talk about it from the assistant coach position is not right, though.”
World Rugby chief Brett Gosper also addressed the issue during the governing body’s opening media conference, stating that doping incidents in the game remain isolated.
“We’ve been testing the players at this World Cup for the past four years and haven’t stopped, mainly out-of-competition, where you’re more likely to catch offenders,” he said.
“Our belief is that we do not have a systematic or institutional doping problem at the elite level of rugby. We invest vast sums of money in a very meticulous drug-testing programme in terms of testing via passports.”
Matt Proudfoot (Forward Coach) of South Africa during the South African national rugby team media conference at Sheraton Grande Tokyo Bay Hotel on September 17, 2019 in Urayasu, Japan. (Photo by Steve Haag/Gallo Images)
Proudfoot also noted that the Springboks are continuously under scrutiny when it comes to what they take in.
“It happens weekly. The players are tested on most off-days. Probably six to eight players will be tested on an off-day basis prior to every one of our Bok camps, and right the way through the Rugby Championship.
“Testing is the only viable mechanism to ensure a clean sport.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.