15/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Models pose for a photograph during a “Maquill Art” fashion show on a street in Abidjan on September 5, 2019.  “Make-up is not only about passing pencil and lipstick”: the first artistic make-up festival in Cote d’Ivoire wants to break preconceived ideas and popularize a previously unknown profession. Picture: AFP / Sia KAMBOU
					
				
					
					
				
				
					1/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					This picture taken on August 26, 2019 shows female players posing for a photo after an underwater hockey training session ahead of the Southeast Asian (SEA) Games in the Philippines later this year, at the National Aquatic Centre in Bukit Jalil, on the outskirts of Kuala Lumpur. Invented in the 1950s in Britain — where it is known as “Octopush” — to help divers keep fit during the winter months, the game has gained a small but dedicated following from Europe to Asia. This year the unusual discipline is set to debut at the Southeast Asian Games, the region’s biennial mini-Olympics that attracts thousands of athletes. Picture: AFP / Mohd RASFAN
					
				
					
					
				
				
					2/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					A small group of climate change activists are seen picketing on a street corner near the Brazilian embassy, 25 September 2019, Pretoria. They were protesting the destruction of the Amazon rainforest and the threat to the many indigenous people and animals living in the rainforest. They call for the UN and governments to intervene and stop the privatisation of the Amazon. Picture: Jacques Nelles
					
				
					
					
				
				
					3/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					A floating barrier contains garbage, including plastic waste, at the Matias Hernandez River in Costa del Este, Panama City, on September 23, 2019. Countries as diverse as Chile and Panama are searching creative solutions to give the plastic a second use or prevent it to end up in the sea. Picture: AFP / Luis ACOSTA
					
				
					
					
				
				
					4/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Lillian Dube poses with pupils from Roodepoort Primary School where it was announced that Clover Nutrikids and CHOC Childhood Cancer Foundation SA would once again partner up to fundraise for the purchasing and building of a new Clover Nutrikids CHOC House in Port Elizabeth.The various CHOC houses across the country provide a home away from home for families whose children are affected by cancer and need to travel long distances from home to receive treatment. Picture supplied 25 September 2019
					
				
					
					
				
				
					5/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					An actor performs during the preview of ‘Halloween Horror Nights’ at the Universal Studio on Sentosa Island in Singapore on September 25, 2019. Picture: AFP / Roslan RAHMAN
					
				
					
					
				
				
					6/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Melissa Stockwell competes in the run portion of the Legacy Triathlon-USA Paratriathlon National Championships on July 20, 2019 in Long Beach, California. Picture: Sean M. Haffey/Getty Images/AFP
					
				
					
					
				
				
					7/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Students and demonstrators try to shield themselves from a stream of water shot by the riot police during a protest in Bogota, Colombia, 25 September 2019. Clashes between demonstrators and members of the riot police paralyzed traffic in two of the main avenues of the city. The protests were organized in response to allegations of abuse by police as well as corruption and misuse of funds by an official at a local university. Picture: EPA-EFE/MAURICIO DUENAS CASTANEDA
					
				
					
					
				
				
					8/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Echo Frames eyeglass frames infused with voice-commanded digital assistant Alexa are pictured at at Amazon’s headquarters in Seattle on September 25, 2019. Picture: AFP / Glenn CHAPMAN
					
				
					
					
				
				
					9/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Workers paint an advertisement billboard in Newtown, Johannesburg, 25 September 2019. Photo by: Emmanuel Croset
					
				
					
					
				
				
					10/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Abdullah Abdullah, Chief Executive of Afghanistan traveling via helicopter for the final campaign rally in Bamiyan, Afghanistan on September 25, 2019. Afghans will head to the polls on Saturday, September 28th. The country is struggling with unrelenting violence and a very high death toll for August as many question whether it is work showing up to vote in the upcoming Presidential elections. President Trump cancelled peace negotiations with the Taliban with a possible return to the talks still unclear after 18 years of war confusion and chaos to a solution remains. The US state department also cut $100 million in aid this week. Picture: Paula Bronstein/Getty Images
					
				
					
					
				
				
					11/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					German boxer Zeina Nassar poses during a training session on August 23, 2019 in Berlin. Berlin boxer Zeina Nassar’s fighting spirit has won her plenty of titles, but her battle to wear the hijab in the ring has also made her an equal opportunity champion. Picture: AFP / Tobias SCHWARZ
					
				
					
					
				
				
					12/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					A man drives past burning tires during a protest against fuel shortages and to demand the resignation of President Jovenel Moise, in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on September 25, 2019. In the midst of a political crisis and after a shortage of gasoline that revived the protest of the opposition, the Haitian president gave a speech, broadcast on September 24, his first after weeks of silence, but without announcing any concrete measures that could calm the popular anger. Picture: AFP / CHANDAN KHANNA
					
				
					
					
				
				
					13/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					People walk inside the new Beijing Daxing International Airport during its first day of operation in Beijing on September 25, 2019. The futuristic new airport in Beijing, which is expected to become one of the busiest in the world, was opened by China’s President Xi Jinping on September 25. Picture: AFP / STR
					
				
					
					
				
				
					14/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					 In this handout provided by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), The Soyuz MS-15 spacecraft is seen in this long exposure photograph as it launches with Expedition 61 crewmembers Jessica Meir of NASA and Oleg Skripochka of Roscosmos, and spaceflight participant Hazzaa Ali Almansoori of the United Arab Emirates  September 25,  2019 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Picture: Bill Ingalls /NASA via Getty Images
					
				
					
					
				
				
					15/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					Models pose for a photograph during a “Maquill Art” fashion show on a street in Abidjan on September 5, 2019.  “Make-up is not only about passing pencil and lipstick”: the first artistic make-up festival in Cote d’Ivoire wants to break preconceived ideas and popularize a previously unknown profession. Picture: AFP / Sia KAMBOU
					
				
					
					
				
				
					1/15
				
				
					
					
				
					
					This picture taken on August 26, 2019 shows female players posing for a photo after an underwater hockey training session ahead of the Southeast Asian (SEA) Games in the Philippines later this year, at the National Aquatic Centre in Bukit Jalil, on the outskirts of Kuala Lumpur. Invented in the 1950s in Britain — where it is known as “Octopush” — to help divers keep fit during the winter months, the game has gained a small but dedicated following from Europe to Asia. This year the unusual discipline is set to debut at the Southeast Asian Games, the region’s biennial mini-Olympics that attracts thousands of athletes. Picture: AFP / Mohd RASFAN
					
				
					
					
				

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.