The Royal Race Day at Turffontein, Johannesburg, on April 13 has confirmed that Princess Charlene of Monaco will be in attendance for this year’s event.
With a top hat and tails dress code, the Royal Race Day had already promised to be one of the most elegant affairs on the racing calendar, but this confirmation will push it over the top, with free entrance for the general public on the day.
The princess launched her Princess Charlene of Monaco Foundation at the Gugulesizwe Primary School grounds in 2012 and a number of the children from the school and Lesabe Primary School in Benoni will be hosted by her at the event. The two schools are the main beneficiaries of the Royal Race Day and are set to each receive donations of R50,000.
On her most recent visit to South Africa in February this year, Princess Charlene, who hails from Benoni, also visited the school accompanied by her children, the royal four-year-old twins Princess Gabriella and hereditary Prince Jacques.
“I have taken a personal interest in the school and I will support them and do my best to make sure that the learners at the school are exposed to great sports, health, and safety, so that they can build a great community around them,” the Princess said.
As for the racing, the headline race on the day is the Grade 1 HSH Princess Charlene Empress Cub Stakes for fillies and mares over 1,600m with total stakes of R1,000,000. Two Maiden Plates, of which one is for fillies and mares only, with total stakes of R250,000 each and sponsored by Princess Charlene of Monaco, serve as supporting acts.
“I look forward to attending this year’s Royal Race Day at the historic Turffontein Racecourse and, of course, continuing the support of a number of worthy causes,” she said.
“To have the horse-racing community rally behind this is quite extraordinary… Hopefully, the day will also contribute to restoring some of the glamour back into the sport of racing.”
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.

								
								
								
																	Would you like to place a bet
										on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.