Suzuki has upgraded it’s Ciaz sedan, adding a fresh new look, more specifications and a powerful new 1.5 litre engine.
The new Ciaz upgrade also in- troduces Suzuki’s Smartphone Linkage Display Audio (SLDA) to the GLX specifi cation level and adds an additional model – a Ciaz 1.5 GL Automatic – to the range.
There will be no mistaking the new Ciaz from its predecessor, thanks to a new painted grille that stretches the full length of the nose between the headlamp clusters for a more modern and purposeful visual signature.
The grille is framed by chrome inserts which, in the GLX spec- ifi cation level, continues on the shoulder line and door handles and terminates in a new chrome garnish strip above the number plate on the boot lid.
The grille is fl anked by new headlamp clusters with automat- ic LED headlamps and integrat- ed daytime running lights on the GLX model. The GL model, in turn, gets new halogen projector headlamps.
Moving to the side profile, the Ciaz features 15” steel wheel with wheel covers for the GL specification level, while the designers have created new 16” polished chrome wheels for the GLX spec- ifi cation level. Inside the Ciaz 1.5 GLX in either manual or automatic, you will be greeted by Suzuki’s new 7” SLDA touchscreen audio system.
Recently introduced on the GLX specification level in several other Suzuki models, the SLDA system combines full Android Auto, Apple CarPlay and MirrorLink smartphone integration with modern features such as a reverse camera with rear park sensors, Bluetooth connectivity, and voice commands. In addition, the Ciaz GLX now off ers cruise control as standard.
In Suzuki tradition, all models feature the same dynamic and passive safety systems.
In the Ciaz, this includes airbags for the driver and passenger, ABS brakes with electronic brake- force distribution (EBD) and brake assistance (BAS) and the addition of a high-level brake light. All models are also fitted with an alarm and immobilizer, child-proof rear child door locks and additional side-impact protection. Suzuki has not only upgraded the Ciaz styling and specification but has replaced the 1 373cc K14B-engine with its modern 1 462cc K15B engine with multi-point fuel injection and variable valve timing.
The new engine delivers 77kW at 6 000rpm and 13 Nm at 4 40o rpm, which is 7kW and 8Nm more than the previous model. Fuel consumption increases marginally to 5.5 litres per 100km for manual models and 5.6 litres per 100km for automatic models in a combined cycle, and owners will benefit from the additional power and more linear power delivery of the K15B engine.
The engine is matched with a five-speed manual gearbox or four-speed automatic gearbox with the latter now also available in a GL specification level.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.