At first glance, it is difficult to believe that the Volvo XC90 will be entering its sixth year of production next year as the initiator of Gothenburg’s Iron Mask styling language still looks remarkably fresh and modern in the face of newer competitors. What makes this even more remarkable is that Volvo has been subtle with the visual upgrades, to the point where finding any exterior differences between the current iteration and the original will only result in strained eyes. It is an approach that has worked in the big Volvo’s favour as it remains an eye-catching, literally, but still...At first glance, it is difficult to believe that the Volvo XC90 will be entering its sixth year of production next year as the initiator of Gothenburg’s Iron Mask styling language still looks remarkably fresh and modern in the face of newer competitors.
What makes this even more remarkable is that Volvo has been subtle with the visual upgrades, to the point where finding any exterior differences between the current iteration and the original will only result in strained eyes. It is an approach that has worked in the big Volvo’s favour as it remains an eye-catching, literally, but still elegant and stylish SUV that does make a huge fuss about itself, even if the signature Thor’s Hammer LED daytime running lights will lead you to believe otherwise.

The most controversial aspect to emerge from the most recent round of alterations however is on the inside where Volvo has dropped the seat count to six with the second row now sporting two chairs and the middle seat replaced by a walkthrough space. While only an option as the seven-seat arrangement is still standard, the optional Crystal White Pearl Metallic (R5 950) example that arrived for testing also represents the swansong for the current model, especially up front where electrification will soon be expanded beyond the range-topping T8 model.
Seeing as our XC90 came powered by the D5 turbodiesel engine, a powertrain that will not be carried over into the next generation in 2022, and with the badge on the tailgate identifying it as the flagship Inscription model, it made for the ideal road trip vehicle when its minder headed off for a recent breakaway to the Free State.

As mentioned, while there is little to distinguish the XC90 from an appearance point, it is the interior where Volvo has succeeded with its clean minimalist design in housing all of the major functions within the tablet-like Sensus Connect nine-touch touchscreen display. Despite appearing complicated, the system is easy to use and logically laid-out. In typical Volvo fashion, the overall built quality and fit-and-finish are top notch, however, the imitation mesh lays exhibit a less than premium feel despite looking good.
Included on our XC90 were a number of options that raised the sticker price from R1 131 600 to a lofty R1 269 400. These include the sports steering wheel (R1 800), a black headliner (R4 000) and panoramic sunroof (R20 750), a 230-volt power outlet (R1 550) and two spec packs; the R10 500 Luxury made up of ventilated and massaging front seats as well as automatic folding rear headrests, plus the R66 500 Premium Pack that featured Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, Head-Up display, keyless entry and an automatic tailgate, Blind Spot Information, a surround view camera system, heated steering wheel plus a superb 19-speaker Bowers and Wilkins sound system that made the experience come to life when the audio is switched to the Gothenburg Concert Hall setting.

As accomplished as the interior is, its newest addition is also the most pointless. Admittedly, the removal of the centre seat has aided entry to the third row and although comfort for those seated in the rear has improved, the lack of a central armrest will be a big annoyance for those on longer journeys.
What’s more, while the XC90 has kept is spacious cabin intact, as well as its boot that measures 314 litres with all six seats up and up to 1 947-litres with the second and third rows down, the lack of that middle chair simply looks strange for a vehicle that became renowned for its seven-seat configuration.

Turn the intricate start button, the XC90’s biggest foible emerges in the agricultural sounding 2.0-litre Drive-E oil-burner. A key criticism since it’s debuted, the twin-turbocharged four-pot produces 173kW/480Nm, but still feels underpowered and sluggish, even after it benefited from Volvo’s PowerPulse system two years ago.
Entrusted with hauling 2 000kg of XC90 along, the engine is nonetheless paired to a slick shifting eight-speed Geartronic gearbox. But don’t expect it to react with a knockout punch when you switch the Drive Mode selector from Comfort, which it was predominantly in, to Sport mode – the other settings being Eco, Comfort, Off-road and Individual.

Out on the open road, the XC90 felt planted and the ride smooth and comfortable thanks to those extremely comfortable seats and the optional (R26 750) air suspension. As well as the usual array of safety tech that is simply too long to mention, the trek down to Bethlehem also saw the Pilot Assist semi-autonomous driving aid being used, which made for a rather disconcerting if exciting glimpse of the future. Consumption however was on the high side and after seven days and 1 042km in various conditions, the XC90 recorded a best of 10.1l/100km, well and truly off of the bullish claim of 5.7l/100 km.
As much of a standout as the Volvo XC90 continues to be, it still compromised by is engine that is badly in need of either more power or a bigger displacement engine before that electric switch. Granted, while the majority of buyers are likely to pay little attention to this, what is unavoidable are those six-seats which simply appears out of place and, in this writer’s opinion, an option not worth ticking over the standard seven.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.