The African National Congress (ANC) is standing by secretary-general Ace Magashule after reports that a British NGO Shadow World Investigations has come forward with new evidence of corruption on the part of Magashule as well as former Free State agriculture MEC Mosebenzi Zwane.
The Guptas allegedly sold computers worth R1.7 million to Magashule’s government while he was Free State premier for the inflated price of R3.8 million, while Zwane stands accused of having received R500,000 in benefits after the lease for the controversial Estina Dairy Farm in Vrede was signed.
In a statement, the governing party calls the reports “yet another attempt to tarnish the image” of Magashule, adding that “this so-called NGO is rehashing old allegations which have never been substantiated”.
“The ANC does not see these allegations in isolation, but as part of a well-orchestrated and coordinated vilification campaign” against Magashule aiming to “fuel further divisions”.
The party also says that Magashule should not “dignify these insults with a response”.
Who wrote the statement is unclear, but while it lists ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe as a contact, it is written in the hyperbolic style of Carl Niehaus, who is currently stationed at Luthuli House, working for Magashule’s office, and is believed to have written multiple statements on behalf of the ANC, through the office of its secretary-general.
Niehaus, one of Magashule’s closest allies, also shared the statement on Twitter.
READ MORE: ‘Jou moer, Max!’ says Niehaus, after call for Magashule to go to jail
According to Paul Holden, director of Shadow World Investigations, the new evidence comes from forensic analysis of the “Guptaleaks” emails.
The NGO, which is also headed up by former ANC MP Andrew Feinstein, has released a report detailing the allegations and has revealed its intention of testifying at the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture.
Apart from the computer and Zwane “benefits” claims in the report, the Guptas stand accused of sending rusty farm equipment to Vrede.
The report also accuses the Free State department of health of buying mobile medi-clinics for three times their worth.
The ANC ends off the statement by accusing the NGO of serving an “agenda” and being part of a “malicious campaign” by those who are “hell-bent on sowing divisions” in the ANC, and calling for the party to unite against “wedge-drivers”.
Magashule has regularly been linked to allegations of corruption, with links to the Gupta family and others, along with allegations of abuse of power, especially during his years as the Free State premier. This was examined in great detail in a bestselling book, Gangster State, which Magashule undertook to sue the author for, but appears to have not yet done.
(Compiled by Daniel Friedman)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.