The Willowton Group’s demand for the “immediate resignation” of Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) chief executive Thabang Moroe represents “sheer embarrassment” for the game’s decision-makers, former president of the governing body Dr Mtutuzeli Nyoka believes. “Cricket’s house is on fire. Yet what makes the situation so baffling is that outside parties – sponsors, media, supporters, observers – are the ones that are pointing it out, not the administrators,” Nyoka, who served in his role between 2008 and 2011, said yesterday. “You can’t blame a sponsor for demanding action. If we can identify all the problems from afar, imagine how acutely aware...The Willowton Group’s demand for the “immediate resignation” of Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) chief executive Thabang Moroe represents “sheer embarrassment” for the game’s decision-makers, former president of the governing body Dr Mtutuzeli Nyoka believes.
“Cricket’s house is on fire. Yet what makes the situation so baffling is that outside parties – sponsors, media, supporters, observers – are the ones that are pointing it out, not the administrators,” Nyoka, who served in his role between 2008 and 2011, said yesterday.
“You can’t blame a sponsor for demanding action. If we can identify all the problems from afar, imagine how acutely aware the individuals within the organisation must be. The inaction on addressing these issues is simply embarrassing.”
The 59-year-old also joined a growing chorus of critics questioning the continued suitability of Moroe in his current position, where he’s increasingly centralised his power.
“I have to agree with the majority of observers. The decline within CSA has been evident for some time now. The nadir, for me, was the World Cup, where our national team performed deplorably. We’re a cricket nation known for our excellence,” he said.
“It has become evident that the CEO is out of his depth and he needs to be removed. I’m not saying he’s solely responsible for all the troubles, because he reports to a board that should hold him accountable.
“But the reality is that the buck ultimately stops with him. He’s the individual that needs to take the fall for this crisis.”
Nyoka’s sentiments echoed those of former South African Test captain and United Cricket Board MD Ali Bacher.
In an interview with ESPNCricinfo, he noted how, as a mediator between Proteas legend Graeme Smith and Moroe in discussions over CSA’s director of cricket, the lack of communication from the federation struck him.
“The CEO is out of his depth and I strongly suggest he resigns in the best interests of South Africa cricket,” said Bacher.
However, one former administrator, who didn’t want to be named, noted how important it is that Willowton also called for CSA president’s Chris Nenzani’s resignation.
“People still seem to forget that the CEO reports to the board. Moroe couldn’t have done all these things without the board’s knowledge,” he said. “It’s a good thing that the sponsor called not only for Moroe’s resignation, but Nenzani’s too. The board is equally culpable.”
Even the Democratic Alliance (DA) waded into the debate.
“It has become abundantly obvious that Moroe is not fit for office, and may not have the necessary aptitude or experience to run the organisation,” said Willem Farber, deputy shadow sports minister.
Moroe’s position is set to be discussed a special board meeting tomorrow, though there’s no clarity on whether this means he’ll depart.
– heinzs@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.