The Blitzboks reached a second World Sevens series final in succession after beating France 21-14 in their final four meeting at the Cape Town edition on Sunday.
As was the case in Dubai last weekend, they’ll face the All Blacks.
South Africa went scoreless in the first and even fell behind after Marvin O’Connor went over for the French.
But a bustling second half saw them run in three tries, with Ruhan Nel and JC Pretorius dotting within a minute of each other to tame the opposition.
Shakes Soyizwapi added the cherry on top, before France hit back with a consolation try in the final moments.
Earlier. the Blitzboks negotiated a testing assignment against Kenya on Sunday to win 17-5.
South Africa certainly didn’t have it their own way against their plucky fellow Africans, who impressed with their ferocity at the breakdowns and, at least initially, tight defence.
The hosts also didn’t quite hit their straps and conceded several penalties throughout as well as falling off a few tackles.
One of numerous handling errors in the first half – when Seabelo Senatla fluffed a big attacking opportunity – led to the giant Alvin Otieno’s opening score after Pretorius’ high shot on defence made the try inevitable.
But the Blitzboks’ famed calmness showed again after that.
Chris Dry’s turnover tackle freed up Senatla to hare down on the left, before the ball was sent down to Nel, whose physicality held up brilliantly against Kenya’s big defenders as he stretched over the line.
South Africa took the lead early in the second half when Rosko Specman found space and launched a nice nudge forward, which went into touch.
The resulting set-piece was solid and the magnificent Nel was once again used as strike runner.
Kenya, however, continued to press and looked menacing before Justin Geduld laid down a marker with a brilliantly executed tackle on Otieno.
The East Africans were awarded a penalty for an earlier advantage, but the Blitzboks won an important psychological battle.
From the resulting tap, the Kenyans made field again before Dry, clearly inspired by Geduld’s hit, stayed on his feet brilliantly for a crucial turnover.
South Africa kicked to touch, launched their set-play and Soyizwapi shrewdly nudged forward for Selvyn Davids to gather and score the clincher.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.