Businessman Fana Hlongwane on Wednesday is expected to testify at the commission of inquiry into state capture chaired by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo.
According to testimony by former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas, Hlongwane was present at a meeting held at the Gupta residence in Saxonwold on October 23, 2015, where he, Jonas, was allegedly offered R600 million if he accepted the position of finance minister.
In his testimony last August, Jonas painted a picture of a desperate Duduzane Zuma, the son of former president Jacob Zuma, who allegedly pulled all the stops to ensure that the Gupta meeting took place. Recalling a sequence of events, Jonas told Zondo that it began with Hlongwane meeting Jonas in Johannesburg to repeat Duduzane’s request for a conversation, stressing the importance of the Guptas.
During his testimony in October, the young Zuma told the commission that he, Hlongwane, and Jonas had met to clear up rumours abound at the time that Hlongwane had allegedly blackmailed Jonas.
Last year, former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor issued an apology to Hlongwane for mistaking him with Brian Hlongwa during her testimony at the commission.

Mentor had incorrectly recalled being introduced to Hlongwane by Zuma Jr on an Emirates flight to Dubai in her written statements and oral presentation.
The commission will also hear Transnet-related testimony from expert witness Alister Chabi.
The commission is also expected to hear testimony from one of the officials at in the office of the former Free State premier, Ace Magashule, namely Moroadi Cholota.

The commission will hear Transnet related testimony from Mr Alister Chabi on Wednesday 4 December 2019 at 09H00, We will also hear testimony from Mr Fana Hlongwane and Ms Moroadi Cholota.#StateCaptureInquiry https://t.co/t2yM2vgsYk pic.twitter.com/bdDFhHZfVk
— State Capture Commission (@StateCaptureCom) December 4, 2019

Watch the proceedings live courtesy of the SABC:

(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu. Additional reporting, Kaunda Selisho.)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.