Buying a second hand car doesn’t have to mean getting less out of it.
To help you get more, we have collated some of the best care tips for your vehicle.
We will take a look at a few driving habits that will extend the years on your car, will discuss the importance of regular maintenance, the best ways of filling up, as well as the importance of regularly inspecting the condition of various components.
Check your driving habits
Take it easy
One of the first things you can do to extend the lifespan of your second hand car is to be more aware of your driving habits.
When you first start your car, take care not to push the engine too hard at first.
Don’t squeeze the wheel
When taking corners be careful not to position the steering wheel in the extreme left or right.
Doing this will eventually cause damage to your power-steering pumps, which can be quite expensive to replace.
Familiarise yourself with the owner’s manual
Your owner’s manual will give you all the information that you will need to familiarise yourself with your vehicle.
You should get an owner’s manual for your car when you buy it, but if not, you can often find it by doing an online search.
Stick to a regular service plan
By rule of thumb, you should service your car every 10 000km or so. This might change a little depending on the age and make of your car.
When buying a second hand car, it is always wise to opt for a comprehensive maintenance plan. This will not only ensure that the condition of your vehicle is always kept in check, but will also save you money on services and repairs in the long-run.
Only use high quality fuel
It is a much better option to spend that little bit extra on better fuel.
Doing so will not only preserve the condition of your engine, but will also give your car more torque for better performance.
Don’t fill up if you see the tanker
When pulling into a service station to fill up, check to see if the tanker is there. If it is, rather move on to the next garage or come back later.
When service stations replenish their stocks, the process often kicks sediment up in their vats. This sediment would normally sit on the bottom, and not be pumped into your car’s petrol or diesel tank.
However, when it is kicked up during replenishment, it may well end up in the guts of your car.
Check oil, water and tyres regularly
As you drive, all of these factors gradually pose a problem for your car’s immediate performance, but also pose a risk to its overall condition.
Similarly, when there is not enough water running between your engine and radiator, your engine will overheat and cause a break down.
The tread and pressure in your tyres are should also be checked on a regular basis.
Contact Second Hand Cars for a service plan
Here at Second Hand Cars, we don’t just collate the best deals from local car dealers, but also offer services and maintenance plans that will help you get more out of your vehicle, for longer.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.