MEC for education in Gauteng Panyaza Lesufi shared a video on social media of a vehicle on its side and seemingly inebriated occupants of the car emerging from its shattered windscreen.
Lesufi said what appeared to be the scene of an accident was a result of “worshipping this drug called alcohol, the enemy of the nation”.

The price we continue to pay for worshiping this drug called alcohol, the enemy of the nation #AlcoholFreeSA https://t.co/fZIsAeLOmm
— Panyaza Lesufi (@Lesufi) December 16, 2019

In response to a social media user, Lesufi said he would never tire of advocating for the non-use of alcohol.
“Even when we fought apartheid, we were told the power of the apartheid regime was so strong we were wasting our time.”

I know but I will not get tired. Even when we fought apartheid, we were told the power of the apartheid regime was so strong we were wasting our time
— Panyaza Lesufi (@Lesufi) December 17, 2019

Meanwhile, the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) announced on Monday that since the start of the festive season in 2019, out of the 1,600 motorists arrested nationally, a majority were caught for driving under the influence of alcohol.
This includes a driver whose alcohol test was seven times above the legal limit.
The RTMC also said that most of those arrested were arrested for speeding and for outstanding warrants.
“In addition, traffic officers discontinued more than 1,200 vehicles that were found to be un-roadworthy and impounded more 600 public transport for operating without proper operating permits.
“More than 330 roadblocks have been held throughout the country resulting in more than 426,842 vehicles being stopped and checked and 142,152 traffic fines being issued.
“Driving under the influence of alcohol and speeding continues to be a major cause of concern,” the RTMC said.
A motorist was detained in Nkowankowa in Limpopo after being found with an alcohol content that was seven times above the legal limit, said the RTMC.
Another was arrested on the N1 Westerberg also in Limpopo driving at 218km/h while another was arrested on the N4 in Rustenburg in North West province doing 220 km an hour, the corporation added.
“Meanwhile two motorists and two immigrants were arrested after allegedly offering bribes to traffic officers.
“Motorists are warned to obey the rules of the roads all the time and traffic officers are commended for showing no mercy to those who break the rules of the road.
“Traffic officers will remain in the heightened state of alertness throughout the festive period.”
(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu)
ALSO READ: 46 arrested for drunk driving in the Western Cape over the weekend, 81 arrested in KZN


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.