After a few days of sunshine dominating the sky, lower temperatures are expected to return to parts of the country for the next few days.
The South African Weather Service issued warnings yesterday of thunderstorms, flooding, strong winds and heavy downpours in the eastern parts of the country, particularly in parts of Gauteng including Randfontein, Lenasia and the Soweto area.
Weather forecaster Wayne Venter said the isolated thunderstorms were expected to continue today in Gauteng, Mpumalanga, the western and southern parts of Limpopo and some parts of KwaZulu-Natal.
He said these parts of the country had a 30% chance of rain, but the rest of the country would be hot to extremely hot, including the Free State, North West, Northern Cape, the Western Cape interior, Eastern Cape and Limpopo.
Isolated thunderstorms were expected in the northern parts of the Free State, North West, Gauteng, the Highveld of Mpumalanga, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal tomorrow.
Hot to very hot temperatures would continue in the central and southern interior, including the North West, Free State, Northern Cape, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.
In the northern part of the Northern Cape temperatures would range from 38ºC to 40ºC.
On Sunday, there was a 60% chance of rain in the central and eastern parts of the country, including parts of the Free State, Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, North West and Mpumalanga.
“There is also a 60% chance of rain in the southern part of Gauteng, including Johannesburg, and a 30% chance throughout the whole province.”
He said the rest of the country would see warm to hot temperatures with the exception of the eastern parts of the Eastern Cape and southern parts of KwaZuluNatal where temperatures would be cool.
“The rain is all a part of the normal summer weather system but from late Sunday afternoon there will be tropical moisture coming from Angola and Namibia trickling down Botswana and into the country.
“That will cause scattered showers and thundershowers in parts of the country,” he said.
– jenniffero@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.