Mounting questions over Thabang Moroe’s continued suitability as Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) chief executive is an opportunity for stakeholders to take stock of the broader issues plaguing the local game, believes former Proteas bowler Fanie de Villiers. “Look, it’s obviously embarrassing when sponsors start to demand the resignation of an office bearer,” he said yesterday, referring to the Willowton Group – a long time CSA partner – calling for the “immediate” departure of the embattled federation’s head. “Yet, while CEOs and presidents form general perceptions, the battles in the boardroom aren’t the only true reflection of our cricket. “But we...Mounting questions over Thabang Moroe’s continued suitability as Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) chief executive is an opportunity for stakeholders to take stock of the broader issues plaguing the local game, believes former Proteas bowler Fanie de Villiers.
“Look, it’s obviously embarrassing when sponsors start to demand the resignation of an office bearer,” he said yesterday, referring to the Willowton Group – a long time CSA partner – calling for the “immediate” departure of the embattled federation’s head.
“Yet, while CEOs and presidents form general perceptions, the battles in the boardroom aren’t the only true reflection of our cricket.
“But we can tell you that we don’t have sufficient expertise at lower levels of the game to manage the workloads of our fast bowlers. Cricket’s questionable management has left us with sub-standard coaches, little overall financial investment in the game and poor on-field results. Core competencies are lacking everywhere.”
De Villiers’ more holistic view echoes a growing stream of frustration under so-called layman supporters, illustrated by a “Meeting of Cricket Lovers” gathering at the Wanderers last night.
The event called on all cricket fans, scorers, umpires and sponsors to take part in an “initiative [that] will be a public display of the dissatisfaction at which cricket is currently being handled by CSA”.
Organisers hope the movement can spread to cities countrywide.
Former Proteas batting legend Barry Richards agreed.
“It’s bad when commercial partners start asking for your CEO to step down,” he said. “It’s a disappointing situation. I’ve seen on various forums, particularly Facebook, how cricket fans are uniting and expressing their collective concern. Our game is being ruined by individuals who don’t have the interests of the players and game overall at heart.”
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.