The eNCA debacle over how it handled former top journalist Samkele Maseko and other staffers raged on yesterday, with analysts slamming the media house for acting as a mouthpiece for members of the political elite. The editor-in-chief of eNCA was requested to respond on various platforms, but was not forthcoming. According to Xubera Institute for Research and Development’s Benedict Dube, eNCA’s decision to pull out of covering the Economic Freedom Fighters’ (EFF) elective conference – in solidarity with Daily Maverick, amaBhungane and other media houses banned from it – was not based on the principles of ethical and transparent journalism...The eNCA debacle over how it handled former top journalist Samkele Maseko and other staffers raged on yesterday, with analysts slamming the media house for acting as a mouthpiece for members of the political elite.
The editor-in-chief of eNCA was requested to respond on various platforms, but was not forthcoming.
According to Xubera Institute for Research and Development’s Benedict Dube, eNCA’s decision to pull out of covering the Economic Freedom Fighters’ (EFF) elective conference – in solidarity with Daily Maverick, amaBhungane and other media houses banned from it – was not based on the principles of ethical and transparent journalism as it claimed.
“They [eNCA] are highly conflicted on journalism ethics,” Dube said. “They claim to be non-partisan media, but they employed [Kanthan] Pillay who founded the Capitalist Party of South Africa.
“They were trying to embarrass the EFF by walking out. It had nothing to do with the media being banned.”
Dube also said the Daily Maverick had a relationship with Malema when it was beneficial.
“When the mission to get rid of the former president was accomplished, they parted ways.”
Political analyst Somadoda Fikeni said media objectivity was being compromised.
The EFF has resolved to establish an alternative voice to guard against negative depictions of socialist ideals, said Sinawo Tambo, a member of the central command team.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.