The last thing any South African affected by crime wants to hear is that prisoners could be pardoned or have their sentences’ reduced. At the Day of Reconciliation celebrations on Monday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced he had decided to grant a special remission of sentence to specific categories of sentenced offenders, probationers and parolees. He said it was in line with established international practice and the constitution, and was part of celebrating 25 years of democracy. “Remissions of sentences are always carefully considered, taking into account interests of the public and the administration of justice. We recognise that incarceration has...The last thing any South African affected by crime wants to hear is that prisoners could be pardoned or have their sentences’ reduced.
At the Day of Reconciliation celebrations on Monday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced he had decided to grant a special remission of sentence to specific categories of sentenced offenders, probationers and parolees. He said it was in line with established international practice and the constitution, and was part of celebrating 25 years of democracy.
“Remissions of sentences are always carefully considered, taking into account interests of the public and the administration of justice. We recognise that incarceration has followed a judicial process and that sentences have been duly imposed after conviction: previous remissions were granted to coincide with important national days,” Ramaphosa said.
It does not extend to any sentenced offender, probationer, parolee or day parolee who is serving for, among others, sexual offences; murder/attempted murder; armed robbery; sentenced to life imprisonment; child abuse. Out of the 233,945 parolees, probationers and prisoners, 71.3% would benefit from the remission. However, only 8.99% – 14,647 inmates – are to be considered as they are closer to their parole consideration.
The decision didn’t sit well with the DA.
“The underresourced and severely constrained police force works tirelessly, often with little or no recognition to investigate crime and prepare evidence for a criminal trial. Prosecutors work equally tirelessly under severe constraints to prosecute those cases in an effort to make South Africa a safer place for all. The fruits of their hard labour are now to be rewarded by ‘special remissions’ for over 14 000 convicted criminals,” said DA MP Glynnis Breytenbach.
“The slap in the face that this reckless, foolhardy approach represents to the literally thousands of South Africans who fall victim to crime on a daily basis, cannot be overstated. To suggest, as the ANC does, that South African prisons ‘shall only [be] for serious crimes against the people, and shall aim at re-education, not vengeance’ is to understate the nature of the problem to the point of the bizarre.”
Should offenders be rehabilitated and reintroduced to society? Or should the key be thrown away after being jailed?
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.