19-year-old University of Venda student and model Mukondeleli Anemone Mathabi is eager to make her mark in the modelling industry.
Mathabi is from Maniini village outside Thohoyandou in Limpopo, and started modelling three years ago.
“Modelling is in my blood. It is not just a passion, but something which has grown to be a part of me. It has been a great journey in this industry. I decided to start modelling because I believe in bringing hope to society. I aspire to inspire other young girls who also want to make it in the industry.
“I want to serve as a stepping stone to other people’s achievements, and the only way to do that is through building myself as a model first,” Mathabi told Polokwane Review.
She was crowned Miss Nzhelele Valley in August, and Miss University of Venda recently.
“Being a model means coming to terms with reality, because I was born for this and this is the only thing that makes me happy every day. Modelling to me is a spiritual thing and not just about showcasing myself. Modelling comes with a lot of soul connection and massive passion as well as loving myself and accepting who I am,” Mathabi said.
She said the lack of local modelling agencies hindered many young girls’ dreams.
“It is difficult to participate in modelling since there are not many modelling agencies around. Our young girls are left with little or no confidence or are not courageous enough to go out there and be brave enough to stand on the stage,” she said.
She draws inspiration from the 25-year-old Tamaryn Green, who was crowned Miss South Africa 2018, as well as current Miss South Africa and now Miss Universe 2019, Zozibini Tunzi.
“It is possible if you tell yourself that you are just one step away from your destiny. Whenever you fail, get up, try again and do not give up. Most of the people who failed in life are the people who did not realise how close they were to success,” she added.
She is currently studying for a bachelors in education at the University of Venda and aspires to win Miss South Africa and Miss Universe.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.