The free pass that Cricket South Africa’s (CSA) board tried to create for itself through the suspension of CEO Thabang Moroe won’t fly when it comes to the players.
The South African Cricketers Association (Saca) on Monday once again reiterated its call for the decision-making group at the embattled federation to resign en masse.
“We are astounded that the Board of CSA which has led the organisation during a tumultuous period when all this has happened now refuses to take responsibility for the deep, deep crisis in which cricket finds itself,” said Saca chief Tony Irish.
ALSO READ: CSA board throws Moroe under the bus
“No one disagrees with the removal of the chief executive, but to suggest that the buck stopped with him alone, and for the Board to cling so desperately to power, is a matter for serious concern.”
The players union’s biggest gripe with CSA president Chris Nenzani and his fellow board members, who are still reeling from losing three independent directors last week, is the argument they couldn’t have been unaware of the disastrous decisions taken from a corporate governance perspective.
Massive financial strife, a high court battle between the two parties over domestic cricket’s restructure, the withdrawal of a major sponsor in Standard Bank and multiple contractual breaches are just some of the scandals that have unfolded under the board’s watch.
Nenzani at the weekend stated that renewed engagement with the players would be an “urgent priority”, but even if it weren’t, Saca probably won’t be attending any meetings.
“Saca has noted the appointment of Jacques Faul, as the acting chief executive, and is prepared to deal with him in good faith in order to attempt to resolve as many as possible of the current crises affecting the players.  Saca will not, however, lend credibility to the board of CSA by dealing with a ‘negotiating panel’ if this comprises any Board members.  It is hoped that the new chief executive will appoint a highly competent director of cricket so that, even at this very late stage, he can start putting the best possible professional structure around the Proteas team,” said Irish
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.