The Blitzboks have been drawn in a tough Pool A for this weekend’s Cape Town Sevens.
The Springbok Sevens side, who won the past weekend’s title in Dubai with a 15-0 Cup final win over New Zealand, will contest Pool A alongside 2018/19 World Rugby Sevens Series champions Fiji, series runners-up USA and Japan.
The Fijians, surprisingly, did not make it out of their pool at the Dubai Sevens after losing to Argentina.
They beat Canada 40-17 in the ninth place playoff match.
The South Africans kick off their campaign at Cape Town Stadium against Japan in the final game on Friday (20:03), before facing Fiji (13:51) and the USA (20:03) on Saturday.
The World Rugby Sevens Series – as competitive as it is right now – is all about grabbing that one opportunity and the team would love nothing more than doing just that.
That is according to forward Dylan Sage, who will be back at the Cape Town Stadium for the first time in three years when the Cape Town Sevens kicks off on Friday, playing in his 26th tournament for South Africa.
Sage made his Blitzbok debut in 2015, played again in 2016, but missed out in 2017 due to injury and 2018 because of Super Rugby commitments.
The Cape Town Sevens is very close to the heart of the Blitzboks and it is a privilege and honour to play in front of their home crowd, because they have that one opportunity at it, says Sage.
“Cape Town is that one chance we get to play at home, and we need to use that opportunity,” said Sage.
“It is a great event, always a sell-put and the organisers always make sure that there are lots of things keeping the crowds entertained.”
The Blitzbok forward will not lack any motivation come Friday.
“The bodies are sore after Dubai and the long flight home but being welcomed at the airport like we were with a band playing and fans waiting, and then having a good night’s rest at home is more than enough to perk you up again,” he said.
“We have closed the door on Dubai and will start the week fresh. New challenges await in Cape Town. We have a tough pool and the teams will be coming for us, so will have to be ready for that.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.