American model and business mogul Kim Kardashian-West found herself on the right side of Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) members on Sunday after posting a supportive tweet to Julius.
EFF leader Julius Malema was the subject of another “explosive” report involving money. He has been trending since, with most fighters sharing messages of support to their CiC, who they say has been a target of the media because he “fights” for the black child.
The EFF leader has also been charged by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for allegedly firing live ammunition into the air at a rally to celebrate the EFF’s fifth birthday in the Eastern Cape in 2018.
NPA Eastern Cape spokesperson Luxolo Tyali said the EFF leader had been charged with five counts, including the unlawful possession of a firearm.
EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, however, argued at the time that Malema had fired a toy gun rather than a high-powered automatic rifle.
In response to the Sunday reports, Ndlozi said: “White media and AfriForum are working overtime to have our CIC behind bars. This stems from a deep hatred they hold on him and the ideas he represents. Unfortunately, prison or the very threat of it, has historically failed to defeat an idea whose time has come. We are not moved!”
As fighters were busy rallying behind their leader on social media, Kardashian-West coincidentally tweeted a message of support to Julius, which confused South Africans, who asked whether she was referring to Malema.
Kim Kardashian-West’s deleted tweet
Even the EFF leader retweeted the tweet.












Kardashian-West was, however, advocating for the release of American Julius Jones, who is on death row in Oklahoma. This despite “maintaining his innocence and compelling evidence that he was wrongfully convicted”, according to the model.
“His case has also been strained with so much racial discrimination,” said Kardashian-West.
Americans have been rallying behind the inmate’s release, with online petitions started to draw attention to the case.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.