The sun has been shining and it appears all systems go for the R500,000 World Sports Betting Grand Heritage (Non-Black Type) over 1475m.
This race has been delayed for 12 days owing to inclement weather and hopefully, being at the start of the summer holidays, racing fans will go out to the Vaal and enjoy what is an extremely entertaining race.
It is unique by South African standards as it contains 28 runners and is run over an unusual distance up the Vaal straight. The race was not reopened after the delay so the same 28 horses and the two reserves are carded to go to post and there appears to be no reason why the selections should differ as a result of the date change.
The only change is that Sean Tarry will now have a full complement of 10 runners. He had eight in the race as well as the two reserve runners but with the two KwaZulu-Natal-based runners, Elusive Heart and Desolate Road, withdrawn due to no transport being available, both In Cahoots and Rockin Russian have made the final line-up.
Social Order, who is quoted at 10-1, still looks the runner they all have to beat.
This six-year-old son of Count Dubois would probably prefer a little further but did run a very nice second behind stable companion Tierra Del Fuego last month over 1400m.
He was run – ning on strongly when going down by a long head so the extra 75m, coupled with the stronger handling from Gavin Lerena, could make the difference. With all the rain having fallen and then having time to dry out, the course should be in immaculate condition so one is not certain if there will be any draw bias. In the past, there has been some preference for the outside barriers and that could also suit Social Order as he is drawn No 23.
Riverstown ran a great third in the Grade 3 Graham Beck Stakes over 1400m at Turffontein last month and followed that up with a 1.25-length second behind
Tarry- trained Ikigai. This son of Byword is lightly raced and can only get better. He is also drawn towards the outside and will be ridden by log-leading jockey Warren Kennedy. The next three are all drawn towards the inside and they include Fired Up, Russian Beat and Captain Of Tortuga, who loves this course and distance.
The Heritage Consolation is also run over 1475m and this race will give the racing public an idea of just how good Oden really is.
Originally from Zimbabwe, this four-year-old Oratorio gelding won four of his five races at Borrowdale and then arrived and notched up a fifth win in his Vaal debut.
The only concern is whether he will get the distance as his only defeat came over 1600m and all of his wins over 1100m and 1200m. Ryan Munger rides for Gokhan Terzi.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.