Police in KZN said they and other security agencies would be on high alert during the Vodacom Durban July this weekend and after-party event at Moses Mabhida People’s Park.
KZN SAPS spokesperson, Captain Nqobile Gwala said planning between the SAPS, security clusters and the event coordinators had been ongoing for weeks.
“A pro-active approach, which resulted in a successful event previously, has been adopted for this event. SAPS officers and personnel will be in and around both areas of events as well as around Durban to tackle the problems which might disrupt the events. The race course gates will be opened from 10am and there will be other parallel events which will be monitored by police until next morning,” Gwala said.
Gwala said police and other law enforcement would monitor these events and ensure that there was peace and stability.
“Spectators and horseracing fans must behave themselves and enjoy the entertainment. No sharp instruments and no firearms are allowed in both events. The police will clamp down on those who break the law,” Gwala said.
Gwala urged all those attending the Durban July to protect their valuables while at the race course.
“If they are indulging in alcohol, they must be dropped off and picked up or alternatively use a cab. Those who will be found drinking and driving will be arrested. Whilst on the race course, they must be aware of criminals who may be mingling with the crowd so don’t leave any valuables unattended.”
The police are appealing to those who will be using the parking facility to make sure they do not leave their valuables exposed in their vehicles and they must make sure that their vehicles are locked at all times.
“The roads near Greyville race course including the avenue, Avondale, and Gladys Manzi will be closed and monitored by the police.”
(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.

								
								
								
																	Would you like to place a bet
										on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.