Given that the Sharks broke all ties with the Du Preez family just over two weeks ago, it’s probably not quite a coincidence that Curwin Bosch was suddenly made available to the media this week.
The gifted 22-year-old has arguably been slap bang in the middle of the drama that not only blighted the Durbanites’ mediocre Super Rugby campaign, but also – allegedly – played a big part in coach Robert du Preez snr departing one year before his contract was supposed to expire.
And the irony of it all is that Bosch did absolutely nothing wrong.
ALSO READ: Du Preez’s ‘nepotism’ places undue burden on Sharks
Throughout the year, a storm brew and then raged as Du Preez persisted with picking eldest son, Robert jnr, at flyhalf despite his form gradually deserting him.
It led to accusations of favouritism among critics, especially when Du Preez initially tried to seemingly compromise by selecting Bosch at fullback.
Bosch’s form was so compelling that Du Preez eventually had to relent and switched him to pivot.
But as the playoffs approached, the Sharks coach reverted back to Robert jnr at No 10.
Robert du Preez. Photo: Gallo Images.
Fans and local media smelled a rat, Du Preez labelled the reporters “cockroaches” in public, franchise management had to put out PR fires and the axe was sharpened.
ALSO READ: WATCH: Sharks coach calls media ‘cockroaches’
In between it all, all Bosch did was light up a misfiring backline.
That steely focus explains why he’s not making much of a fuss over the events that occurred earlier this season.
“It’s all part of the game,” said Bosch.
“We all have our own opinions on a lot of things. To be honest, I think the whole experience has just been a big learning curve. I obviously learned a lot at No 15 about timing and space. Going forward, that’s going to benefit when I’m playing at flyhalf.”
The two-Test Springbok though acknowledges he’s got a fair path to travel in becoming a consistent flyhalf, a reality that was showcased in the opening game of this year’s Currie Cup, where a rampant Griquas made Bosch and his pack’s life a misery.
“It’s been very nice (to have extended game-time at flyhalf),” he said.
“I’ve been working closely with coach Dave (Williams, skills coach) throughout the year. There are a few things that we keep working on with my attacking game to try and get me better every week. It’s been a great challenge.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.