Whereas only 516 units of the previous model left local dealership floors, the new Sport has been diversified with the option of a turbocharged petrol or turbodiesel engine, both teamed to an automatic gearbox with drive going to the front wheels only.
Aesthetically, the Sport retains the same bodykit as before in the form of wider door sills, a colour coded rear diffuser and body matching hue front the skidpate, while black 19-inch alloy wheels, quad exhaust outlets and a gloss black grille completes the look.
Unsurprisingly, Hyundai has followed the same approach with the new Sport as it did with its predecessor in that the interior continues with no upgrades.

Based on the top-spec Elite model though, the standard specification list includes the seven-inch touchscreen infotainment with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, leather seats with the fronts being electric, keyless entry, static bending LED headlights, push-button start, dual-zone climate control with rear vents and a cooled glovebox, folding electric mirrors, a panoramic sunroof, front and rear USB ports, electric windows all around and cruise control.
On the safety front, the Sport features six airbags, Hill Hold Assist, Blind Spot Detection, Rear Cross Traffic Alert, a reverse camera with rear parking sensors and Electronic Stability Program.
As mentioned, the Sport now offers the option of two engines, albeit retuned from the units powering the Elite. In petrol form, the 1.6 T-GDI produces 150kW/300Nm instead of 130kW/265Nm, while the newly added 2.0 CRDI oil-burner churns out 150kW/460Nm, an increase of 19kW/60Nm.

On the petrol, the amount of twist is send to the tar via a seven-speed dual-clutch gearbox while the diesel harnesses its grunt through an eight-speed torque converter automatic. No performance figures were released.
Priced at R654 900 for the petrol and at R664 900 for the diesel, both Sport variants come standard with a seven year/200 000 km warranty and a five year/90 000 km service plan.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.