The ANC in Tshwane has submitted a substantive no-confidence motion against embattled city manager Moeketsi Mosola, reports Pretoria East Rekord.
The motion will be considered at a council meeting on Thursday.
Tshwane ANC leader Kgosi Maepa said the motion was triggered by an Auditor-General South Africa (AGSA) report regarding “malfeasance, rampant corruption and maladministration” under Mosola’s watch.
He said the AGSA report covered more than R6.1 billion in “irregular, fruitless and unauthorised” expenditure in the 2017/8 financial year.
ALSO READ: Tshwane manager Mosola ‘purges’ senior staff, including ‘Solly’s bodybuilder’
“The ANC caucus has decided to push for the immediate suspension of the city manager and for disciplinary processes to commence,” said Maepa.
This decision was based on the AGSA report and Mosola’s “failure to spend money in the Capex budget”.
Maepa claimed Tshwane mayor Stevens Mokgalapa would be tabling a report in council today “for us to approve a round table agreement for the city to officially separate with the city manager”.
He said the ANC would not withdraw its motion of no confidence “until we are satisfied that the proposed separation agreement is fair and lawful”.
Maepa said the ANC caucus would not be party to any “golden handshake” separation agreement.
“The separation agreement should be humane, fair, transparent and lawful based on acceptable universal standards of employment settlement agreements,” said Maepa.
Mokgalapa told Rekord previously that he was waiting for a report into the controversial Glad Africa tender and that any action would follow report recommendations.
Meanwhile, tensions rose in the Tshwane council chambers as the EFF said a sitting was illegal because it started 20 minutes late.
Sending the house into an uproar, EFF councillors approached the podium where acting speaker ZC Khumalo was sitting.
They had a heated exchange with him, requesting for the caucus to be an hour later.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.