As painful and often detrimental as a split can be, the Hiroshima-based automaker’s separation from Ford four years ago has, arguably, worked in its favour given the impressive turn-out of products that have made the transition from drawing to forecourt reality.
Ever since replacing the venerable 323 sixteen years ago, the Mazda3 has gone on to become one of the company with the Zoom-Zoom philosophy’s core models, not only amassing combined sales of six million units, but also accounting for 30% of Mazda’s annual sales volume in the 120 countries it is sold.
In a segment that it is becoming tougher to crack however, Mazda simply had to up its game. With the all-new 3, not only has this objective been achieved, but considerably upped as this fourth generation has been re-positioned to take on the premium segment dominated by the Audi A3, BMW 1 Series and the Mercedes-Benz A-Class.

As optimistic as this move might seem, Mazda is adamant that the new 3 can deliver and right from the off, it certainly makes a statement in a way no Mazda before it has ever done.
Incorporating the latest Kodo design language with the Kai concept shown in Tokyo two years ago being the chosen inspiration, the 3 simply looks stunning and rates as the undoubted C-segment standout, especially the hatch in the now iconic Soul Red Crystal paint finish.
Slightly more restrained, the sedan is nonetheless also a departure from its predecessor in that the use of the Vision Coupe concept has resulted in a more elegant and flowing design which does not resemble a hatch with a welded-on boot section. It is however on the inside where the 3 plays its premium card best.

Like the Kai, the minimalist design looks upmarket with the soft-touch materials, sporty steering wheel and optional burgundy upholstery resulting in a cabin that not only looks modern and feels well-built, but also driver-centric.
Adding to the premium tag is the new 8.8-inch MZD Connect infotainment system on all models, which, despite being new, still comes across as the easiest and most user-friendly of its kind on sale today. Controlled via the rotary dial behind the gear lever, and featuring Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, Mazda has also equipped every model with its new Heads-Up Display and a seven-inch TFT instrument cluster on the more upmarket Individual and Astina models.
Speaking of trim levels, Mazda has streamlined the line-up with the Original and Astina Plus being dropped altogether, leaving the Active as the new base model, the Dynamic as the expected top-seller and the aforementioned Individual and Astina.

During the local media launch in Johannesburg last week, most of the time was spent in the Astina, which does its pointy-end status justice by coming equipped with a 12-speaker Bose sound system, 18-inch alloy wheels, Adaptive LED headlights, dual-zone climate control with rear vents, auto folding mirrors, satellite navigation, sliding/tilt sunroof and cruise control.
On the safety front, the Astina features Blind Spot Monitoring, seven airbags, Rear Cross Traffic Alert, rear parking sensors with a reverse camera, Dynamic Stability Control, Brake Assist and Hill Launch Assist. Crammed to the brim it might be, things go array for the 3 on the move.
In the case of the Astina, the 121kW/213Nm 2.0 SkyActiv-G petrol engine has been tweaked while the previous 1.6 has been replaced by an allnew 1.5 SkyActiv-G that develops 88kW/153Nm in the other models. Sadly, the revolutionary 2.0 SkyActiv-X motor plus the new 1.8 SkyActiv-D turbodiesel have both been ruled out.

Out on the launch route near the Cradle of Humankind, the Astina took the various bumps and imperfections in its stride with a composed ride and hint of sportiness, while the excessive use of sound deadening materials has resulted in a cabin that is both quiet and refined.
Unfortunately, the naturally breathing engines, at altitude, lets the side down with the 2.0-litre suffering the most thanks to being paired to an often slow shifting six-speed automatic gearbox, while the six-speed manual, despite its slick and positive feel, has to be rowed with a fair degree of vigour to extract the maximum out of the 1.5.
Mazda has taken a huge gamble with the positioning of the new 3 and while it has lived up to the hype in the looks, packaging and refinement departments, the disappointing drivetrains and high prices, R474 000 for the Astina hatch, leaves it looking vulnerable, especially as it has, by its own admission, revised the monthly sales numbers to below those of the previous 3.
Granted, while some buyers will no doubt have difficulty viewing a Mazda as a premium product, the new 3 has signalled its intentions in a big way and if the mismatched drivetrains are of little consideration, it makes for the ideal anti-SUV.
 
PRICING
HATCH
1.5 Active – R359 900
1.5 Dynamic – R374 200
1.5 Dynamic AT – R387 000
1.5 Individual – R421 900
1.5 Individual AT – R434 700
2.0 Astina AT – R474 000
SEDAN
1.5 Active – R357 000
1.5 Dynamic – R371 300
1.5 Dynamic AT – R384 100
1.5 Individual – R418 800
1.5 Individual AT – R431 600
2.0 Astina AT – R470 800
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.