While most of the world was enjoying Wednesday’s geriatric social media fun thanks to FaceApp, highly vigilant users were screaming bloody murder about the application’s privacy policy and raison d’être.
The app seemed to boom on Tuesday evening after a number of social media influencers all over the world posted images of what they would look like had they aged considerably.

  










 View this post on Instagram


















 
 Jaaaaarre I’m going to be an OG. Ingathi ndizakuthi “izapha ndikusikele inyama kwedini” ????????????
A post shared by  Sobantu Nqayi (@sobantu_nqayi) on Jul 16, 2019 at 10:43am PDT



The ageing filter is something that Trevor Noah has been using for months in a number of promo videos for his comedy shows.

  










 View this post on Instagram


















 
 Watch the oranges carefully, now look down at your wallet, now back at the oranges, now back at your valuables. If they’re gone, don’t blame that $h!t on me! You need to be more mindful of the kind of people you let around you while you stare at dudes juggling oranges on the internet. ????
A post shared by  Trevor Noah (@trevornoah) on May 21, 2019 at 7:33am PDT




  










 View this post on Instagram


















 
 When you love what you do, it keeps you looking young! #LoudAndClearTour
A post shared by  Trevor Noah (@trevornoah) on May 10, 2019 at 5:41pm PDT



What is FaceApp?
According to its app store description, FaceApp is a free mobile app that features a range of pre-set filters that instantly alter the appearance of a persons face by adding wrinkles, sun damage, glasses, facial hair and grey hair using a type of artificial intelligence to “transform your face”. To date, its ageing filter has made it significantly more popular.
Privacy concerns
ABC News reports that the app’s detractors claim the app could collect more than just the photos that are uploaded.
“FaceApp cannot ensure the security of any information you transmit to FaceApp or guarantee that information on the service may not be accessed, disclosed, altered or destroyed,” reads part of its privacy policy.


The app’s privacy page also says they may share user content and your information with businesses that are legally part of the same group of companies that they are part of.
According to ABC News chief business correspondent Rebecca Jarvis, once you opt in to using the app and you allow all its permission requests, you’re giving it access to your phone, i.e,, all of your contacts and pictures.
“Once you allow that you are giving away everything. That’s how they’re paying for it, free isn’t actually free, they’re giving away your information,” said Jarvis.
Other concerns are similar to those first expressed about Snapchat when the app boomed. Many believed the app was developed by the government as a way to collect data for a global facial recognition program.
This has not stopped social media users from enjoying visions of what they may look like 40 to 50 years from now. Check out some of the posts under the #FaceApp and #AgeChallenge hashtags.

READ NEXT: New dating app for Trump fans leaks users’ data: report
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.