The African National Congress (ANC) in the Joburg Region said it received shocking news that a local councillor in Lenasia was working with a syndicate in a scheme of illegal land invasions.
Jolidee Matong, ANC Joburg spokesperson, has made a call to anyone who might have information on the alleged syndicate to come forward. He said he was informed of the matter by Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba on Monday morning.
“Today we have learnt from Mr (Herman) Mashaba that a local councillor in Lenasia is working with a syndicate in a scheme of illegal land invasions.
“The ANC calls on Mr Mashaba and anyone who has knowledge of councillors and individuals involved in illegal land invasions to report to law enforcement agencies with immediate effect,” Matong said.
He has also urged Mashaba to provide information and evidence to back up this accusation so further action could be taken.
“If any ANC councillor is involved in such a scheme we request Mr Mashaba and residents to bring the information and evidence to our attention in order for us to deal decisively with such people.
“The ANC will not tolerate a situation where its councillors and/or members are involved in illegal activities,” Matong said.
Alan Fuchs, DA constituency’s head of Lenasia confirmed that the department received a tip-off that indeed there was a syndicate operating.
“There are political individuals as well as police who are using the situation to enrich themselves. We cannot, however, pinpoint a specific councillor at the moment, but all will be revealed as soon as we have specific information,” Fuchs said.
Last week police fired rubber bullets at residents protesting over land invasions and what they said was the mushrooming of shacks.
The MEC for housing in Gauteng, Lebogang Maile, visited Lenasia at the weekend and promised that the government would work to resolve the issues.
Mashaba said there was a need for him and Maile to work together to avoid the trends of the past.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.