With the official local unveiling set for tomorrow (Tuesday 16 July), the local Supra line-up will consist out of three models, all powered by the same 3.0-litre turbocharged straight-six engine as its co-developed sibling, the BMW Z4 M40i, and which produces 250kW/500Nm.
An eight-speed automatic gearbox is the sole transmission option with Toyota claiming a limited top speed of 250 km/h and 0-100 km/h in 4.3 seconds. Claimed combined fuel consumption is rated at 7.7 L/100 km with the taxable emissions at 177 g/km.
Based on the details released on Toyota’s website, the range starts off with the GR Track whose standard features list includes 19-inch alloy wheels, a leather wrapped three-spoke multi-function steering wheel, aluminium scuff plates, an electrochromatic rear-view mirror, dual-zone climate control, a 10-speaker sound system, cruise control, a reverse camera, daytime running LEDs and electrically retractable mirrors.

On the safety front, the Track comes with a Tyre Pressure Monitor, Hill Start Assist, Traction Control, ABS with EBD, Vehicle Stability Control, auto lock/unlock doors, auto-levelling headlight and push-button start.
Sitting in the middle, the simply titled GR Supra swaps the Track’s fabric seats for Alcantara covered chairs and also adds Adaptive Cruise Control, a 12-speaker JBL sound system, an electrically adjustable driver’s seat, a wireless smartphone charger, heated front seats, Heads-Up Display, satellite navigation, Pre-Crash Alert, Park Distance Control, Lane Departure Warning, Automatic High Beam LED headlights and the Adaptive Variable Suspension system.

At the top-end, the so-called Matte Grey effectively mirrors the GR’s spec level with the only distinguishing feature being its Matte Strom Grey colour option.
In terms of the colour palette, the Track only has one option, Prominent Red, while the GR can he had in six other finishes; While Metallic, Ice Grey Metallic, Prime Silver Metallic, Luminous Black Metallic, Grand Blue Metallic and Striking Yellow.
A thee year/100 000 km warranty and four service/80 000 km service plan is standard on all models.
 
PRICING
Supra GR Track – R963 000
Supra GR – R1 072 300
Supra GR Matte Grey – R1 092 300
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.