South Africa International Relations and Cooperation Minister Dr Naledi Pandor on Monday met and held a bilateral meeting with her Korean counterpart, Kang Kyung-Wha, at the OR Tambo International airport.
Kang Kyung-wha, accompanied by an official delegation, is paying a working visit to South Africa from Sunday and Monday as part of her tour of several African countries.
Several bilateral and multilateral issues of mutual interest were expected to be discussed during the bilateral meeting, including the status of bilateral relations between the two countries, trade and investment, technical cooperation, Korea-Africa development issues, and other global affairs.
Last year, on the margins of the G20 Summit in Argentina, Presidents Cyril Ramaphosa and Moon Jae-in met officially for the first time, making this engagement a follow-up meeting to further deepen bilateral ties.
South Africa and the Republic of Korea (ROK) enjoy well-established bilateral relations since formal diplomatic ties were cemented in December 1992.
The two countries cooperate in a wide range of areas, managed through a structured bilateral mechanism. Both sides are keen on further strengthening bilateral engagement, especially economically.
The ROK is South Africa’s fourth-largest trading partner in Asia, and South Africa is the largest trading partner of the ROK in Africa.
In 2018, South Africa’s total volume of bilateral trade with the ROK stood at approximately R37 billion, with South African exports at R23 billion and imports at R14 billion (in South Africa’s favour by R9 billion).
There are approximately 27 Korean companies in South Africa, with investments in the automotive, manufacturing, ICT, energy, construction, cosmetics and shipping sectors, among others.
The ROK is home to some of the world’s leading brands such as Hyundai, Samsung, KIA, Daewoo and LG, some of which have a local presence.
Between 2003 and 2019, foreign direct investment projects recorded from the ROK represented a total capital investment into South Africa of approximately R31 billion, with over 1,700 local jobs created.
– African News Agency
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.