The Central Gauteng Lions (CGL) and the Bidvest Wanderers Stadium are set to launch the bumper 2019/2020 season ahead on the 1st of September 2019, welcoming the cricket loving community and outdoor lifestyle enthusiast with open arms.
Fans, families, players, sponsors, partners, media, stakeholders and all other integral role players are welcome to attend and there is something for everyone.
The day will cover a broad range of activities including a brief presentation and fan engagement with Dr Ali Bacher and several legendary members of the cricket community who will share their fond memories of the stadium’s history, the accolades, icons and memories.
Fans will also engage with the 2019/20 season Lions squad: players, coaching staff, season plans, new kit and the ever-popular player autographs and mini coaching sessions.
The launch will also cover what’s in store for the upcoming season: Mzansi Super League Jozi Star campaign, England and Australian tours, Pink Day and non-cricket related major events like CookoutSunday 2020.
In addition, attendees will learn how the stadium prepares for the season:

Fan safety is important to stadium management whether you’re three days old or a 90 year old in a wheelchair on a sold out match; How do you to get to us on game day safe and sound.
Stadium pitch preparations will be a firm favourite at our season opener. Wanderers has 12 pitches so allow the Head Groundsman to educate you on what’s being done and how they’re prepared.

There is something for everyone.
Looking at the corporate market and those wanting to engage with their clients, the day will cover corporate offices, suite and hospitality suite packages.
The day is packed with not to be missed memorable stadium tour, visit to the stadium museum, world-class media centre and not to be missed once off visit to the players change room.
A full day of kids and adult entertainment inclusive of various partner activities is guaranteed so bring your walking shoes as you experience all that is wonderful at Wanderers.
As part of the spring day activities, we have partnered with our beverage partners where attendees will enjoy an easy Sunday morning beverage and an array of food stalls at the Bulling garden.
The season launch open day is a free event for everyone, however, attendees are all requested to pre-register their day’s activities on our website http://seasonlaunch.wanderers.co.za.
Pre-registration will assist stadium management in ensuring that you have a seamless and memorable Spring day.

The much-anticipated Bullring 2019/2020 season tickets and corporate hospitality packages are on sale.
An expanded season ticket aims to offer value for money benefits inclusive of discounted offers from various partners.
A lucky season ticket holder stands the chance of winning a super prize inclusive of tickets to the Lions Annual Gala Dinner Awards; Lions Annual Golf Day participation; Pitch Up In Pink Golf Day participation; CGL Annual Awards attendance; an invite to the Presidential suite and PinkDay event launch; as well as a signed Lions shirt and so much more.

For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.