Western Cape community safety MEC Albert Fritz on Friday condemned persistent gang-related violence and killings on the Cape Flats, warning gangsters that “the time for terrorising communities has come to an end”.
This after African National Congress (ANC) activist Cynthia Stoulo was shot and killed in Valhalla Park on Thursday morning at around 7:30am, while walking her seven-year-old child to school. Stoulo was shot several times in the face and died on the scene.
Fritz said: “We are witnessing an attempted fightback from gangs on the Cape Flats. I want gangsters to know that they will not win. The time for terrorising communities has come to an end. I call on the SAPS Intelligence and Detective Services to urgently identify and arrest the gang leaders who gave the orders to shoot. Both Intelligence and Detective Services need to work together to ensure convictions of gang bosses, not just hitmen. I reiterate the City of Cape Town’s call for SAPS to visit the state-of-the-art Transport Management Centre to improve intelligence gathering and sharing.”
He further called upon communities to work with their local SA police and law enforcement to provide information leading to the successful detection, arrest and conviction of criminals and gangsters.
People are urged to contact 10111 or the City of Cape Town’s Emergency Hotline on 021 480 7700. Additionally, illegal firearms can be reported to 078 330 9333.
Fritz said the deployment of the SA Army in crime hotspots and the increase in law enforcement has seen a decrease in murder statistics.
“Thanks to the deployment of the SANDF and the increase in law enforcement, we are already beginning to see a change in murder statistics, and consequently gang-related violence. Statistics reveal that in the past weekend, there were 25 alleged murder admissions. This is more than half of the amount of murders prior to the announcement and deployment of the SANDF. We’ve also seen no murders in Bonteheuwel since the deployment of 100 additional law enforcement officers on 2 July,” Fritz said.
– African News Agency
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.