The South African Sugar Association (SASA) said on Thursday that it had established a task group to determine long-term amendments to regulations pertaining to the sugar industry’s representation structure.
Hans Hackmann, SASA chairperson, said the task group, IkuSASA (meaning future) has representatives from the South African Cane Growers’ Association, South African Farmers Development Association, and from the South African Sugar Millers’ Association.
Hackmann said IkuSASA had been mandated to agree to legislative amendments that would replace the current transitional provisions, which terminate in March next year, and would provide greater direct representation for black small-scale sugarcane farmers.
“Importantly, the IkuSASA deliberations are taking place in the presence of officials from the department of trade and Industry (dti) who have attended all meetings and dedicated much time to this process,” said Hackmann.
“We have committed to delivering the draft amendments to the dti for their consideration by the end of September this year to leave sufficient time for the process of promulgating them before 1 April 2020.”
“To realise the intended effect of delivering a sustainable sugar industry through which all its participants can prosper, requires more than just changing the make-up of our governance structure. It requires bold decision-making and strong committed leadership.”
Despite facing a number of serious challenges to its sustainability, the industry successfully delivered a R172 million programme of transformation interventions during 2018.
In addition, the industry has devised and committed to a R1 billion five-year transformation plan, which is currently being implemented.
Hackmann said that the tax on sugar-containing beverages as well as the recent large volumes of deep-sea imports landing in South Africa had significantly damaged the sustainability of the sugar industry and its socio-economic contribution in the rural economies of KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga.
“Support interventions are required to ensure the industry’s sustainability until such time that the diversified industry vision becomes a reality,” he said.
“Appreciating the need of government to set regulations and make policies that cater for so many competing demands, we are confident that the government sees the sustainability and growth of our industry as a means of serving the greater good of our country.”
– African News Agency
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.