Durbanville Saturday (19-10-19) Best Bet Race No 1 Twist Of Fate A large majority of the big-name horses have had winning starts to their 2019/20 campaign. This trend should continue when highly rated Twist Of Fate – who finished third in the Vodacom Durban July – teams up with Stuart Randolph. This son of Master Of My Fate is as consistent as the day is long and his form proves this having only missed the first three once in last seven performances. He has run with the likes of Do It Again and Hawwaam and held his own. If he...Durbanville Saturday (19-10-19)
Best Bet
Race No 1 Twist Of Fate
A large majority of the big-name horses have had winning starts to their 2019/20 campaign.
This trend should continue when highly rated Twist Of Fate – who finished third in the Vodacom Durban July – teams up with Stuart Randolph.
This son of Master Of My Fate is as consistent as the day is long and his form proves this having only missed the first three once in last seven performances. He has run with the likes of Do It Again and Hawwaam and held his own.
If he is to reproduce any of those efforts today, he will have no trouble defying the top-weight if 61kg.
Bargain Bet
Race 4 No 5 Capkuta
If not too ring-rusty following the 108-day layoff, ultra-consistent Capkuta, who has finished close-up third in five of seven performances – including last three – could prove good value for money when he steps up to 1250m.
He by far has the best form in this eight-horse field and shoulders 1kg less than biggest danger Iron Henry.
 
Turffontein Saturday (19-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 3 No 6 Tallinn
Although unbeaten Tallinn is going up against a strong group of boys, she has impressed in both triumphs and if she brings that form to the Inside track today, she will be extremely hard to peg back.
This daughter of Vercingetorix’s most impressive victory was her most recent over this course and distance when skipping a length clear of Kapama. Her only disadvantage is the fact she shoulders 3kg more than her biggest danger Ballon D’Or at 57.5kg.
The good news is that she is beautifully drawn at No 3 as opposed to that rivals No 10 in this eleven-horse field.
Bargain Bet
Race 8 No 2 Impressive Duchess 
One-time winner, Impressive Duchess from the Corne Spies outfit, has only missed the first three placings once in five starts.
Considering she was returning from a break, that last performance when beaten into second by League Of Her Own was an absolute cracker.
With the benefit of fitness in her favour, she should improve more than the 1.25-length margin she was beaten by on that occasion. Draws are of paramount importance at this venue so she will benefit immensely from the No 1 draw. 
Greyville Turf track Sunday (20-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 4 No 4 Port Key
Mike de Kock-trained Port Key was on an impressive two-run winning streak prior to being unluckily touched off by Set The Standard on the Turffontein Inside track.
It also didn’t help that this four-year-old son of Silvano shouldered 5.5kg more than the winner and was appallingly drawn at No 11 in a 12-horse field. Port Key has recorded two wins and just as many seconds from four starts and in his defence, he was beaten by bad draws in both losses.
The good news is that he gets 2kg from his main danger Pollard today and jumps from an advantageous No 5 draw as opposed to that rivals worst of all.
Bargain Bet
Race 7 No 2 Silver Rose
Seven-time winner, Silver Rose, from the Andre Nel yard is trading at 11-2 and on form looks good value for money.
He simply doesn’t know how to run a bad race over this distance. He has impressively recorded two victories and just as many seconds from five starts.
He is used to beating rivals despite giving them a lot of weight, so the fact he shoulders 8kg more than the bottom-weighted Our Coys – the favourite – shouldn’t raise too many red flags. Nel’s charge made a mockery of Impact Zone in March, despite a 12.5kg disadvantage.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.