Trainer Brett Crawford has a number of solid runners at the Kenilworth meeting tomorrow and combining them in an All To Come bet could see punters profiting handsomely for a small outlay.
Bold Respect, with Corne Orffer in the saddle, is the early favourite in the day’s headline act, a Pinnacle Stakes over 1000m. Orff er has piloted this Bold Silvano gelding in 17 runs, finishing in the money on 14 occasions.
Without a win in about a year and a half, Bold Respect will face stiff competition from, among others, his stable mate Traces. Ridden by Anton Marcus, this Snitzel colt will be aiming to record a second career victory. He returned to racing last month after more than a year off, so it’s probably best to ignore that tenth place finish, 6.10 lengths behind Pacific Trader over the short sprint.
If he regains the form he displayed before the long break, he could do a stable double for Craw- ford. Machiavelli, trained by Candice Bass-Robinson, is another threat but might find the distance a few hundred metres too short. Both his wins have come over 1200m. He is also returning to the track after a break of 87 days. Punters who want to follow the Crawford-runners could start their All To Come bet in Race 3 where jockey Anton Marcus will be hoping Duke Of Cards will go the distance in the 2400m Maiden Plate.
While the two Snaith-runners, Imperial Rage and Over The Odds, are the early favourites here, Duke Of Cards definitely has a Place chance. This three-year-old Duke Of Marmalade gelding is only stepping onto a racetrack for the third time. While his first outing over 1200m in July was one to forget, he did show promise last week when he was asked to run 1800m at Durbanville, making steady progress to be beaten 6.80 lengths by Winter Is Over.
Imperial Rage, with Richard Fourie in the saddle, has come heartbreakingly close to shedding his maiden tag on a number of oc- casions. He was beaten 0.20 lengths two runs back over 1400m by Veratrum and is also getting a first taste of a stayer’s distance. S’manga Khumalo will be guid- ing Over The Odds. This Twice Over gelding has stepped up in distance with almost every race, finishing second in his last attempt over 2000m.
These three should be fighting it out at the finish and it will come as a big surprise if Duke Of Cards is not among the places. The same can be said of Water Spirit in Race 4, a FM 86 Handicap over 2000m. Marcus has been on this filly’s back over 1200, 1400, 1600 and 1800m, so he will know exactly what to do to get her to the line over today’s distance.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.