Ollie le Roux can safely claim to have been one of modern rugby’s original impact players. During a colourful and largely successful international career, the former Springbok prop only started 11 of his 54 Tests. The irony isn’t lost on him then that he’s proposing a radical change to the sport’s rules on substitutes, one that heavily draws inspiration from soccer and to a lesser extent rugby during the amateur era. “I truly believe soccer gets it right,” Le Roux, who illuminated the 1999 World Cup with a spectacular centre-like try against Scotland, said. “We’ve reached a stage where the...Ollie le Roux can safely claim to have been one of modern rugby’s original impact players.
During a colourful and largely successful international career, the former Springbok prop only started 11 of his 54 Tests.
The irony isn’t lost on him then that he’s proposing a radical change to the sport’s rules on substitutes, one that heavily draws inspiration from soccer and to a lesser extent rugby during the amateur era.
“I truly believe soccer gets it right,” Le Roux, who illuminated the 1999 World Cup with a spectacular centre-like try against Scotland, said.
“We’ve reached a stage where the rules on replacements are a bit too flexible. The game needs a new dynamic, where you can add a bit of intrigue. That’s why I think rugby should revert back to seven replacements on the bench, of which you can only use any three.”
Concerns over uncontested scrums and player safety previously led to the introduction of eight-player benches, which allows coaches to pick specialist looseheads and tightheads.
Ollie le Roux of South Africa in action the Rugby World Cup quarter-final match against South Africa at the Stade de France in Paris. South Africa won 44-21. Mandatory Credit: Dave Rogers /Allsport
“That’s all good, but we’re increasingly seeing teams bring on completely new front rows after half-time. If you pick six forwards you basically have a new pack in the second half. That injection of energy and freshness makes the game too loose in the last 20 minutes,” said Le Roux.
“When it comes to Test rugby, one still expects it to be tight and attritional. Test rugby is supposed to be gritty. You don’t want to take that dynamic away.”
Of course there are exceptions, a notable example being how Beast Mtawarira, Bongi Mbonambi and Trevor Nyakane influenced this year’s epic 16-all draw in the Rugby Championship with a superb scrumming performance after coming on in the second half.
However, the Boks’ meeting with Namibia last week was a telling illustration of why Le Roux has a point.
Once Mtawarira and Vince Koch, the starting props, were substituted after storming all-round performances there was a distinct drop in Springbok bullying at scrum time, with Steven Kitshoff and rookie Thomas du Toit rather concentrating on just being steady.
“We need the act of bringing on a replacement to become a true tactical masterstroke again,” said Le Roux.
Pat Lambie of South Africa comes on as a second half substitute for Handre Pollard of South Africa during the 2015 Rugby World Cup Semi Final match between South Africa and New Zealand at Twickenham Stadium on October 24, 2015 in London, United Kingdom. (Photo by Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images)
“We need coaches to really think deeply on what the best course of action would be. Do you gamble on one of your props playing the full 80 minutes so that you can rather bring on a game-breaking backline player to spark something? Or do you leave a livewire scrumhalf on the bench because you feel an enforcer of a lock is more important?
“Limiting a coach’s options when it comes to replacements adds intrigue to the game.”
A potential added bonus is that it could eliminate the negative consequences of red cards on proceedings.
“Of course the game should punish foul play. But we’ve also seen before that it can ruin a contest. I would suggest that a coach should be forced to replace the guy that’s been sent off. But it would count as one of his three replacements,” said Le Roux.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.