While some observers have been surprised by England coach Eddie Jones not being as sharp-tongued this week than  usual, he certainly hasn’t stopped employing some interesting training methods for Saturday’s World Cup final against the Springboks.
The most eye-catching has undoubtedly been asking local scrumhalf, Genki Okoshi, to wear a blonde wig so that he looks just like Faf de Klerk.
Okoshi, who plays for Jones’ former Japanese club Suntory Goliath, has been helping out the Roses on an on-off basis during the tournament.
“He’s got a yellow wig. Well, that was the talk,” Wallaby legend Matt Giteau, who’s currently a teammate of Okoshi, told Fox Rugby Podcast.


“It gives them a picture but also a joking point to take away the seriousness, the severity of this game.”
De Klerk is undoubtedly the nucleus of South Africa’s offensive game and would only make sense to try and replicate what to expect at the weekend.
That ‘kiss’: Faf de Klerk becomes friends with Jake Ball. (Photo by CHARLY TRIBALLEAU / AFP)
However, Giteau – who experienced the Aussies’ narrow loss in 2003’s final – is familiar with the mental pressures of the build-up towards the showpiece match and the sheer fun factor of having Okoshi look like De Klerk could prove beneficial.
“In terms of a mindset, it could do really good things,” he said.
“A World Cup final, you’re not going to leave any stone unturned. Preparing for Faf de Klerk, and it’s definitely to lighten the mood, the severity of the game and keep them nice and relaxed . . . that’s where Genki’s been good.”
Okoshi booked his place in training this week after doing his utmost the previous to look and play like All Blacks halfback Aaron Smith.
“So Eddie said ‘I need you to look at Aaron Smith, watch the way he plays, tackles, defends, talks, communicates. I need you to study him on Sunday and then on Monday come in looking like Aaron Smith and making sure you do everything you can so we get the best preparation.’ He even said: ‘I want you to cut your hair like Aaron Smith’,” said Giteau.
“This was a potential throwaway line but come Monday, Tuesday, this guy Genki had shaved his hair down nice and short and looked like Aaron Smith. I don’t know if he trained like him but he certainly prepared the boys well.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.