Even if it was only against lowly Namibia, Lood de Jager and Beast Mtawarira’s performances proved so compelling that they have barged into the Springboks’ so-called A-team for Friday’s World Cup meeting with Italy in Shizuoka.
The duo was outstanding in the 57-3 victory at the weekend, with the lanky De Jager particularly menacing all-round as a tower of strength in the lineout and ball-carrier.
Bongi Mbonambi also deservedly breaks into the starting line-up as his consistency started to overshadow Malcolm Marx’s less than flashy form.
Bongi Mbonambi during the South African national rugby team training session at Nexta Training Field on September 30, 2019 in Shizuoka, Japan. (Photo by Steve Haag/Gallo Images)
However, the switches in the pack also illustrates the biggest theme of the build-up to the must-win clash: coach Rassie Erasmus and co believe this game will be decided by the big men.
“We have versatile players in the backs who can cover a number of positions and we have planned for different scenarios,” he said.
“This game is going to be decided by the forwards and at the set phases and we wanted to maximise our options in those battles.”
The Boks have improved dramatically since their shock 18-20 loss to the Azzurri, even claiming a comfortable victory a year later, but the meticulous Erasmus isn’t taking any chances against opposition who’ve won both their matches to date at the tournament.
“Italy have had their eyes on this match for a couple of years and will have planned and schemed how to bring us down once again,” said Erasmus.
“This is a defining match for them and while we were focusing on the New Zealand game, they will have had their eyes on this one as the key to the quarter-finals for them. That means we have to be at our absolute best if we are to beat them – we are at the stage already where there are no second chances. That’s a message we have been emphasising to the players this week.”
Springboks: Willie le Roux, Cheslin Kolbe, Lukhanyo Am, Damian de Allende, Makazole Mapimpi, Handre Pollard, Faf de Klerk, Duane Vermeulen, Pieter-Steph du Toit, Siya Kolisi (c), Lood de Jager, Eben Etzebeth, Frans Malherbe, Bongi Mbonambi, Beast Mtawarira. Bench: Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff, Vince Koch, RG Snyman, Franco Mostert, Francois Louw, Herschel Jantjies, Frans Steyn.
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.