EFF leader Julius Malema has offered words of encouragement to former DA leader Mmusi Maimane following the latter’s announcement that he has resigned from the party and parliament after he stepped down as the organisation’s leader on Wednesday.
In response to Maimane’s tweet announcing his resignation from the DA and parliament, Malema said on his return to South Africa, the two of them should meet for conversation.
Malema is attending the 18th Summit of Heads of States and Governments of the Non-aligned Movement in Baku, Azerbaijan, as part of the delegation of the Pan-African Parliament. The summit is expected to be held from October 25 to 26.
Malema tweeted: “You are a good human, being, don’t be discouraged, my big brother.”


Maimane’s resignation from parliament “automatically” brought John Steenhuisen’s tenure as DA chief whip of the National Assembly to an end as it is linked to that of the party’s parliamentary leader who appoints the chief whip.
The DA’s deputy chief whip, Jacques Julius, who was elected by caucus, will take over in the interim, the party’s interim parliamentary leader Annelie Lotriet said in a statement.
Steenhuisen on Thursday told 702 talk show host Eusebius McKaiser that he has been approached to run for DA leader. He said he would consider this.
Meanwhile, the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal on Thursday welcomed new members into its fold, including some who are from the DA.
However, the governing party in the province said it was a coincidence that the announcement of these DA members joining the ANC was made soon after Helen Zille was elected as chair of the DA federal council, which was followed by Maimane’s resignation and Herman Mashaba’s announcement on Monday that he was stepping down as the mayor of the city of Johannesburg.
The ANC said these DA members joining the governing party had nothing to do with what had transpired in the DA in the past week.
The DA’s federal chairperson, Athol Trollip, resigned on Wednesday.
READ MORE: KZN DA members joining ANC following Zille’s return and Maimane’s resignation is only a ‘coincidence’
(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu.)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.