Trainer Glen Kotzen and jockey Morne Winnaar had a dream weekend. First, the duo teamed up to win the Listed RA Stakes in Port Elizabeth on Friday with Viva Rio. Then on Saturday Third Runway thrust her name forward as a major Cape Fillies Guineas contender with an authoritative win in the Grade 2 Western Cape Fillies Championship at Kenilworth on Saturday.
And to top off the weekend, Kotzen and Winnaar celebrated Cat Daddy’s win in yesterday’s showpiece Algoa Cup at Fairview. Kotzen was especially impressed with Third Runway. “She’s a li le filly but is very strong and has a big heart.
A super ride from Morne – pound for pound he’s the strongest lightweight around,” commented an elated Kotzen. Already a Listed winner, Third Runway was allowed to go off an ultra-generous 16-1, with previously undefeated PE hope World Radar (28-10) an uneasy favourite.
Anton Marcus swiftly got Pretty Young Thing (33-10) over from a wide draw to set the early fractions, but Third Runway took it up around 1000m from home. She galloped on strongly in the straight and it was obvious a full 300m  out that she had her closest rival’s number.
Nothing made any impression from off the pace and she had 1.75 lengths to spare at the line. Roll In The Hay was beaten with every chance into third, while the Eric Sands pair of Driving Miss Daisy and Larentina both finished well from hopeless positions and will be more of a threat over 1600m on the summer course with its longer run-in.
World Radar faded right out but was found to be lame afterwards. Favourite backers had enjoyed success in the previous race, when Silver Operator (33-20) took the Grade 3 Cape Classic.
Vaughan Marshall’s charge was well suited by the race conditions and after racing handy was sent into the lead by Marcus at the 300m mark. He looked set to score comfortably but had to hold off a spirited late challenge from Captain Tatters before winning by just under 0.50 lengths. Golden Ducat (11-10) was Racing Express top bet for the day and didn’t let his supporters down. This half-brother of Rainbow Bridge and Hawwaam raced handy and cruised clear impressively late.
There will be a lot more to come. “I really think he will turn out to be a top horse. Mary (Slack) didn’t think he would see the racecourse at one stage, so I’m glad to have him here,” said trainer Sands post-race.
This referred to a hock issue he had while growing up. Finally, kudos should go to track manager Dean Diederichs, as, despite a massive 125mm of rain on Friday, the track was in tip-top condition, with the going merely good to soft.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
							
							
							
															Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.