Severe tropical storms are not be to taken lightly because they can cause huge property destruction and loss of human life. With super typhoon Hagibis – currently the most powerful storm on Earth – it was not surprising that there would be some disruption to matches in the Rugby World Cup (RWC) taking place in Japan. Extrapolations of the path of the ultra storm show that it will pass close to the Japanese capital, Tokyo, this weekend, only the fifth such close approach by such a major storm in the past 50 years. What is surprising is that the organisers...Severe tropical storms are not be to taken lightly because they can cause huge property destruction and loss of human life.
With super typhoon Hagibis – currently the most powerful storm on Earth – it was not surprising that there would be some disruption to matches in the Rugby World Cup (RWC) taking place in Japan.
Extrapolations of the path of the ultra storm show that it will pass close to the Japanese capital, Tokyo, this weekend, only the fifth such close approach by such a major storm in the past 50 years.
What is surprising is that the organisers of the tournament – who knew well in advance that it would take place at the time of possible, or probable, typhoon activity in and around Japan – made no arrangements to deal with any possible disruption.
So, games have been cancelled.
New Zealand and Italy did not meet in their final pool B match, sending the Italians home complaining … even though they had no real prospect of reaching the knockout rounds.
England versus France was also called off – but with no major impact to the final result because both will go through to the quarterfinals.
Most at risk by the cancellations is Scotland, who are scheduled to play Japan on Sunday in a do-or-die encounter. The Scots have to win to see themselves through … but if the game is called off and each team gets two points, then the Thistles will have to go home, allowing Japan to go through.
A cancellation decision will, therefore, only be made on match day, as late as possible.
If Scotland go home, it would be grossly unfair … even worse than going out in a football match in a penalty shoot-out.
Why the organisers could not have added in contingency days, for just such an eventuality, is beyond us.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.