The usual pre-court night vigil failed to take place this week – pointing to dwindling numbers in what has, over several years, become known as the Jacob Zuma solidarity gathering before the former president’s court appearances. ANC bigwigs like provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala and disgraced former eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede used to be by the side of Zuma outside the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg, but were notably absent yesterday. Only ANC provincial member of parliament, Bishop Vusi Dube, a handful of members of the clergy, some traditional leaders, and former MEC Meshack Hadebe, who has been sidelined by the...The usual pre-court night vigil failed to take place this week – pointing to dwindling numbers in what has, over several years, become known as the Jacob Zuma solidarity gathering before the former president’s court appearances.
ANC bigwigs like provincial chairperson Sihle Zikalala and disgraced former eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede used to be by the side of Zuma outside the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg, but were notably absent yesterday.
Only ANC provincial member of parliament, Bishop Vusi Dube, a handful of members of the clergy, some traditional leaders, and former MEC Meshack Hadebe, who has been sidelined by the current provincial administration, graced the scene.
Speaking mainly in isiZulu in appealing for public support in his future court appearances, Zuma thanked the chanting crowd of supporters, some of whom were clad in ANC black, gold and green colours.
Breaking into a popular ANC freedom struggle song Senzeni na? (what have we done?), Zuma depicted himself as a victim of SA’s criminal justice system.
Amid shouts of “yebo, baba” (yes, father) from the crowds, Zuma, who told supporters that his comprehension of English was “not too good”, told those in the gathering why his legal team took the appeal route.
“This trial has taken almost 15 years. We’re back here today and not finished. And we will be here till the end,” he said. “If you reopen a case that has been there for several years, that does not augur well for justice. That is why my lawyers have made an appeal in our application for a permanent stay of prosecution, so that it should be stopped.
“So much has happened which points to a politically-driven conspiracy against me. This has included clandestine meetings involving investigators, political leaders and prosecutors plotting against me, which demonstrates injustice.
“Coming to court here in Pietermaritzburg is like being sent to a slaughter house.
“My rights have been violated, despite there being a constitution which is the supreme law.
“I am happy that you are here to support me and hope that next year you will be here again.
“Your presence shows that we are still united as comrades.”
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.