With its eagerly awaited launch pencilled-in for October 24th, a new report from the United Kingdom has shed more light on the all-new, eighth generation Volkswagen Golf.
Although it is known that Wolfsburg’s iconic hatch will make use of a 48-volt mild-hybrid system and ride on an evolution of the outgoing Mk 7.5’s MQB platform known as MQB Evo, Volkswagen Chief Development Officer, Frank Welsch, has stated that a great deal of development has gone into the interior with the exterior set to be an evolution of the 7.5.
“There are not too many buttons. We have voice control. All the things we have create a better atmosphere. There are ambient lights all the colours of the rainbow! People love this stuff. It’s like the new chrome,” Welsch told Autocar in an exclusive interview.
Referring to a sketch of the interior issued by the British publication, which shows two 10-inch displays for the instrument cluster and infotainment system, Welsch remarked that the image is “close to what you are going to see” in production form, adding that the array of technology features, which has resulted in the initial launch being pushed back due to a series of software glitches, has been simplified despite being similar to that of the ID.3.
“Golf, let’s say, is lower-middle class, and we’re bringing things from the upper class. There are also car-to-car and car-to-X communication systems,” Welsch said, confirming that some markets will also have an illuminated exterior light bar that connects the bonnet with Volkswagen’s newly designed corporate logo.
Although details of the Golf’s drivetrain have been kept under wraps until now, Welsch confirmed that both petrol and diesel engines will be offered, but that the former in 96 kW 1.0 TSI and 110 kW 1.5 TSI Evo guises will be the sole recipients of the aforementioned 48-volt mild-hybrid system.
“We have 48V on the mainstream petrol engines but not on the diesel. The diesel has better CO2 emissions anyway and diesel is more expensive so to keep it balanced, we did it only on petrol. The 48V mild hybrid is not only good in terms of CO2 but also comfortable driving. You won’t hear the restart on the start/stop system,” Welsch said.
“It’s much more powerful with the mild-hybrid starter/generator system. Even while driving, if the car is just rolling, you don’t need extra power. The engine turns off while driving, and if you just touch the pedal, it starts again and you don’t feel it. It’s very comfortable”.
Accordingly, the diesel engine in question will be a revised version of the existing EA288 Evo 2.0 TDI equipped with a new turbocharger and updated exhaust system that Volkswagen claims has improved torque and power by nine percent, while also reducing emissions by 10 g/km of CO2.
In a first, Welsch spoke about the GTI due next year, saying that it will exceed the 180 kW mark using a re-engineered version of the current EA888 2.0 TSI engine. The R, which will reportedly produce 298 kW, will touch down in 2021 with the plug-in hybrid GTE being carried over, albeit with the same output as the Mk 7.5 GTI. Gone though is the all-electric e-Golf that has been discontinued following the introduction of the ID.3.
As before, the Golf will be offered in five-door hatch and estate bodystyles, the latter sporting a 50 mm longer wheelbase, while the previous three-door hatch has been axed. Production is set to take place in Wolfsburg with local market sales set to commence next year.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.