The Lions’ commitment to developing and promoting internally was reinforced on Wednesday with the announcement that Ivan ‘Cash’ van Rooyen will be the franchise’s new head coach for next year’s Super Rugby campaign.
Following the surprising departure of Swys de Bruin, who has now become a full-time consultant and is currently involved on a part-time basis with the Southern Kings, earlier this month, the suits at Ellis Park had to move decisively given that next year’s tournament commences at the end of January already.
However, Van Rooyen’s experience as Currie Cup head coach for the last two years means the core of his squad is already intimately familiar with his methods.
And that’s not even counting his almost decade-long role as conditioning guru at the union.
“Ivan is someone who can build on the successes of past years. He has proven his worth within the Lions’ structures,” said Lions chief Rudolf Straeuli.
Importantly, Van Rooyen also has the support of majority shareholder Altman Allers, who allegedly now wants a more active say in team operations.
“In Ivan we have an outstanding coach that covers all areas. His extensive knowledge of the Lions culture coupled with his scientific background is paramount in crucial decision making factors,” said Allers.
However, the Lions’ coaching group remains relatively inexperienced, which suggests that the Lions’ commitment towards a “correct support system” means there could be some interesting faces showing up as consultants during the season.
Van Rooyen, a humble and even subdued character, is excited.
“We have the opportunity to create something very special. We have a young but dynamic team and a ‘blank canvas’. It is all up to us what we make of it. Standing in front of that ‘blank canvas’, we will establish clear goals, we will decide who will be involved in this process, what will success look like and what tools we will use to measure our success. I am truly blessed to do what I love to do.”
For more sport your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.