Vaal Classic Thursday (02-10-19) Best Bet Race 3 No 1 Ronnie’s Candy Highly rated Ronnie’s Candy has run with the best South Africa has to offer and her form proves this having won at Grade 2 and 3 level. She is weighted to easily win this contest and considering she runs off a high merit rating of 112 while the average of this contest is a low 89, St John Gray’s charge should have absolutely no trouble outclassing this lot despite returning from an 84-day rest. She ran a cracker despite returning from a five-month layoff recently, when unluckily nabbed...Vaal Classic Thursday (02-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 3 No 1 Ronnie’s Candy
Highly rated Ronnie’s Candy has run with the best South Africa has to offer and her form proves this having won at Grade 2 and 3 level.
She is weighted to easily win this contest and considering she runs off a high merit rating of 112 while the average of this contest is a low 89, St John Gray’s charge should have absolutely no trouble outclassing this lot despite returning from an 84-day rest.
She ran a cracker despite returning from a five-month layoff recently, when unluckily nabbed on the line by Pretty Border to lose by a nose. Although she didn’t win, that performance simply proves she races well fresh – big player!
Bargain Bet
Race 6 No 2 Insignis
Insignis seldom finishes too far from the action and although she comes off a layoff and may not be fully wound up, she looks good value for money at 4-1.
This daughter of Go Deputy proved she is an above average individual in her latest attempt when gallantly running down Running Brave to finish third in a Grade 2 over 2000m, losing by a rapidly diminishing 0.65 lengths.
Geoff Woodruff’s charge is a dual winner from four over today’s 1800m distance and is actually yet to run out of the minor money placings.
Insignis is the joint best-weighted runner in the field along with Bize (main danger) and if jockey Marco van Rensburg can get her to overcome the worst draw of all, she will surely fight out the finish.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.