A widely varied racing programme on both four and two wheels entertained enthusiasts at the Zwartkops Raceway near Pretoria on Saturday.
Top billing belonged to two races for SKF Pre-1966 Legend cars, with two separate classes taking to the tarmac. Race one saw Mark du Toit win in the TAR Studebaker Lark, ahead of Vic Campher (Tom Campher Volvo 122S) and Alan Poulter (Tom Campher Volvo 122S). Jonathan du Toit drove the Studebaker the next time and won as well, chased to the flag by Poulter and Campher in their Volvos.
In race one, Mark van Rooyen (Bay Drive Sunbeam Alpine) took the Little Giants class ahead of Terence Botes (Teds Austin Mini Cooper) and Stephen Britz (CTR MGB). Van Rooyen won again in race two, this time followed by Ishmael Baloyi (TAR GSM Dart) and Botes.
DOUBLE VICTORY, TOO. Stiaan Kriel (Kalex Polo) took both the MotorMart VW Challenge Class B victories, almost clinching the year’s overall title. Picture: Paul Bedford
Lyle Ramsay (Monroe Polo) won the first MotorMart VW Challenge race overall, ahead of Rory Atkinson (BHIT Polo) and Lee Thompson (Lee Thompson Polo). Thompson won race two, chased to the flag by Bevin Masters (CPS Warehouse Polo) and Ramsay. Stiaan Kriel (Kalex Polo) took both the Class B victories, doing his overall championship victory prospects a lot of good.
In both races he led home Jacques Smith (Liability Matters Polo) and Stuart Mack (Race Technology Polo). Dawie van der Merwe (Lee Thompson Polo), Andy Gossman (Allwagen Polo) and Mohamed Dangor (MotorMart Polo) filled the respective Class C podiums on both occasions.
Pieter Zeelie (Speads RS12) took the opening Sports Car Challenge race from Klippies Krige (Lotus 7) and Richard Wood (General Energy RWB400). Krige won the next time, followed by Gerald Wright (Sports 2000) and Darryn Lobb (Nash MW3).
Michael Smit (Kawasaki ZX10) took the initial Red Square Kawasaki Masters race from Jaco Gous (Kawasaki ZX10) and Graeme van Breda (Stefanutti Stocks ZX10). Van Breda won race two, followed by Gous and Smit. In the process, Van Breda clinched this year’s Red Square Kawasaki Masters championship overall.
Both the Bridgestone Superbike victories went to Hendrik de Bruin (NETCB Yamaha R1), ahead of Jordan Agliotti (Ridgeways Kawasaki ZX10), with Hein McMahon (BDJ Freight BMW S1000RR) and Shaun Vermaak (Sponsor Needed Kawasaki) taking turns in the third place.
Lance Marais (Fast Bike Suzuki GSXR 750) won the first Bridgestone Challenge race from Naasief Wadvalla (Fastbike Kawasaki ZX6R) and Brad Absil (Ridgeways Yamaha R6). Marais won the next time as well, chased to the flag by Absil and woman racer Landi Sinden (Milwaukee Yamaha R6).
The final round of this year’s regional Extreme Festival will be held at Zwartkops on Saturday, November 9.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.