It is a week of new models from Mercedes-Benz and the first one out the blocks today is the A-Class Sedan. A-Class Sedan “The A-Class Hatch launched late in 2018 has been joined in 2019 by the new B-Class, the new CLA and now the new A-Class Sedan. This is in response to the wishes of many customers that require a compact sedan for small families. The introduction of the A-Class Sedan enables the brand an opportunity to target different audience segments,” says Selvin Govender, Marketing Director for Mercedes-Benz Cars South Africa. The A-Class Sedan offers great utility which includes...It is a week of new models from Mercedes-Benz and the first one out the blocks today is the A-Class Sedan.
A-Class Sedan

“The A-Class Hatch launched late in 2018 has been joined in 2019 by the new B-Class, the new CLA and now the new A-Class Sedan. This is in response to the wishes of many customers that require a compact sedan for small families. The introduction of the A-Class Sedan enables the brand an opportunity to target different audience segments,” says Selvin Govender, Marketing Director for Mercedes-Benz Cars South Africa.
The A-Class Sedan offers great utility which includes above-average shoulder, elbow and headroom plus the easy access to the rear and a boot that offers 420 litres of practical space. And individualisation both on the outside and in the inside leaves nothing to be desired with the Progressive and AMG Line trim levels that are offered.
No less exciting is the car’s interior, inviting you in with an impressive amount of space and a stunning modern design. The centrepiece is a dashboard that dispenses with the traditional cowl to deliver a continuous surface from driver to passenger windows while the media display floats freely above.
This fully free-standing cockpit is available in two versions, a standard offering with two seven-inch displays or an optional extra version with two 10.25-inch displays. The new sedan also makes room for an impressive display of technology. It revolutionises the relationship between car and driver thanks to the Mercedes-Benz User Experience system (MBUX), which ushers in a new era for Mercedes me connectivity at the same time.

One can access the multimedia system in a variety of ways: Touchpad, Touchscreen, Touch Control buttons on the steering wheel – or even through Voice Control using every day, conversational language, which is activated with the keyword “Hey Mercedes”. All the while, artificial intelligence learns about driving habits and preferences over time, ensuring that the A-Class Sedan more and more suits your style every time you take the wheel.
The A-Class Sedan is available in two variants – the R533 400 A200 and the R604 800 A250 Sport, with the diesel model expected in South Africa in 2020. Both models benefit from new engines.
The A200 with the M282 engine is powered by a 1.3-litre unit, which generates 120kW and 250Nm of torque with a 7G-DCT dual-clutch transmission. And the M260 2.0 litre engine of the A250 Sport generates 165kW and 350Nm and is also available with the same 7G-DCT dual-clutch transmission.
CLA

The new CLA is not only the most emotional vehicle in its class, it is also highly intelligent: from MBUX Interior Assist, which recognises operational demands from gestures and equips the interior with intelligence, through augmented reality for navigation and understanding indirect voice commands.
The new CLA offers an array of intelligent driving solutions. The design underlines the coupe character with its stretched form and design elements such as the bonnet with powerdomes or the rear licence plate, which has been moved down. As such, it does justice to its predecessor’s status as a design icon.

“With the first CLA we had created a totally new segment with a four-door coupe and celebrated huge sales success by selling 750 000 CLA’s globally,” says Johannes Fritz, Co-CEO of Mercedes-Benz South Africa and Executive Director Mercedes-Benz Cars. The new CLA will also be available as an Edition 1, as an optional extra. In terms of both the exterior and interior, this limited-edition special model has numerous visual accents which underline its exclusivity.
The CLA is available in two engine variants – the CLA 200 and the CLA 220d. The R570 500 CLA 200 with the M282 engine is powered by a 1.33 litre unit, which generates 120 kW and 250 Nm of torque with a 7G DCT dual-clutch transmission. The R612 800 CLA 220d with the OM654q four-cylinder diesel engine is powered by a 2.0 litre unit, which generates 140kW and 400 Nm of torque with an 8G-DCT dual-clutch transmission.

The suspension with adjustable damping offers this exciting spectrum. The Dynamic rocker in the centre console selects the programme and characteristics: “Eco”, “Comfort” or “Sport”. The AMG suspension is systematically tuned for high cornering speeds with a low tendency to roll. As a result, the dynamic potential of your vehicle can take full effect. For you this means more driving pleasure.
GLC

Modernity, strength and versatility: this is what the design of the GLC and GLC Coupe stands for. The design idiom of the GLC follows the design philosophy of sensual purity and illustrates the carefully considered interplay of aesthetics, agility and intelligence.
The Mercedes-Benz GLC has been in the market for four years and is the brand’s most popular SUV model. The strengths of this mid-size model include outstanding driving characteristics both on and off the road, spaciousness, practicality and comfort. The numerous upgrades also benefit the GLC Coupe, which combines the sportiness of a coupe with the practicality of an SUV. Both models are now equipped with LED High Performance headlamps as standard.

Their contours have been significantly changed, and they are now smaller and flatter. This makes the torch-like outline of the daytime driving lights even more prominent, and the typical Mercedes-Benz light signature even more recognisable. Multi-beam LED headlamps are available as optional equipment.
Redesigned all-LED rear lights are also included as standard. In the interior, a high quality of finish and high-grade materials such as open-pored wood are combined with user-friendly controls. As standard, both versions of the GLC feature the modern, learn-capable infotainment system MBUX – MercedesBenz User Experience. The driving assistance systems have been considerably extended.

Active Distance Assist Distronic and Active Steer Assist provide even more comfortable support to help the driver to keep a safe distance and steer. The speed is adjusted automatically ahead of bends or junctions. Active Steer Assist helps with forming an emergency corridor and with changing lanes.
The risk of potential collisions can be reduced by the turn-off function of Active Brake Assist, by automatic braking if the driver fails to see oncoming traffic. Also new is Trailer Manoeuvring Assist, which aids when manoeuvring in reverse. As an alternative to the standard Agility Control suspension, the steel Dynamic Body Control suspension with adjustable damping is available.

The damping is individually controlled at each wheel depending on the driving situation, speed and the condition of the road surface. The Air Body Control suspension can be chosen for even more comfort and variability. In combination with the standard Dynamic Select, this also makes it possible to lower or raise the vehicle level by 15mm.
The GLC comes to the starting line with completely new engines. The GLC and GLC Coupe are powered by the new generation of four-cylinder petrol and diesel engines with outputs ranging from 143kW to 180kW.

The GLC 300 retails for a suggested R842 800, the GLC 220d at R786 100 and the GLC 300d at R825 100. The GLC 300 Coupe starts at R985 300, the GLC 220d Coupe at R929 600, and the GLC 300d Coupe at R964 200.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.