The penultimate round of this year’s Extreme Festival fully entertained a large Western Cape crowd at the Killarney circuit on Saturday.
Officially, top billing belonged to the Global Touring Car contingent. Race one went to Simon Moss (All Power Audi), chased to the flag by Johan Fourie (EPS Couriers BMW), Michael van Rooyen (Gazoo Toyota Corolla) and Daniel Rowe (VW Motorsport Jetta).
Race two, started from an inverted grid, saw Robert Wolk (Chemical Logistics BMW) lead from starting lights to chequered flag, followed by Van Rooyen, Keagan Masters (VW Motorsport Jetta) and Tschops Sipuka (All Power Audi). Adrian Wood (VW Motorsport Golf GTI) won the first GTC2 race from Charl Smalberger (Universal Health Golf GTI) and Paul Hill (Kalex Golf GTI).
Bradley Liebenberg (VW Motorsport Golf GTI) took race two, followed by Wood and Hill. The three Falken Polo Cupraces saw top title contestants Bradley Liebenberg (Hello Mobile Polo) and Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Polo) engage in titanic struggles throughout the day. Liebenberg won from Kruger in race one, with Matt Shorter (Monroe Polo) on the final podium step.
CLOSE STUFF. Jeffrey Kruger (Universal Health Polo) and Brad Liebenberg (Hello Mobile Polo) fought hugely forthe respective Falken Polo Cup victories.
Race two was red-flagged twice, firstly when Simon Need rolled his Photoniks Polo at high speed, then again when Jason Campos got tagged, and his Turn 1 Polo slammed into a tyre barrier. Liebenberg and Kruger again finished first and second, this time ahead of Justin Oates (Total Polo). The final race saw Liebenberg cross the line first but then he got disqualified for a technical infringement. That handed the victory and title lead to Kruger, with the title to be resolved at the very last race meeting of the year.
Julian van der Watt (Investchem Mygale) took both the Investchem F1600 races from Scott Temple (Road to Race Mygale) and Nicholas van Weely (Magnificent Paints Van Diemen).
The first SA Superbike Championship race saw race leader Steven Odendaal’s Petra Yamaha R1 briefly go into limp mode and Lance Isaac’s Supabets BMW S1000R go on to three cylinders. Then Clint Seller crashed his King Price Yamaha R1, leaving local heroes David McFadden (RPM Centre Yamah R1) and Brandon Haupt (Fueled Yamaha R1) to take the respective first and second places, followed by a recovered Odendaal. Haupt and McFadden indulged in full scale combat the next time around, swapping the lead five times during the 10-lap race.
Haupt snatched the lead in the last corner of the race and beat McFadden to the flag by three hundreths of a second, with Lance Isaacs third. Kewyn Snyman (Yamaha R6) took the first Supersport 600 race victory from Blaze Baker (JRB Yamaha R6) and Jared Shultz (ASAP Yamaha R6).  Shultz won the next time, ahead of Snyman and Connor Hagan (Yamaha R6).
Jaco Gous stepped off his Kawasaki ZX10 while leading the opening Red Square Kawasaki Masters Cup race, leaving Greame van Breda (Stefanutti Stocks ZX10) to win ahead of Jacques Ackermann (FG Distributors ZX10) and Michael Smit (Kawasaki ZX10). Van Breda and Gous diced mightily in race two, with Van Breda eventually winning from Gous by five hundreths of a second. Jacques Ackerman took the final podium spot.
Hayden Jonas (WP Motors Yamaha R1) won both the Bridgestone Superbike races from Rob Cragg (Madmacs Kawasaki ZX10) and Lubabalo Ntisana (LB Auto Kawasaki ZX10).
Danie van Niekerk (Wingfield BME E36 325i) took the opening Mikes Place Clubmans saloon car race from Michael le Sueur (New Engineering Golf) and Cody Alberts (Alfaholix BMW 330). Van Niekerk scored another victory the next time out, this time followed by Alberts and Baby Jacobs (Executive Dicisions BMW M5).
The final round of this year’s national Extreme Festival series will be held at the Red Star Raceway near Delmas on Saturday, October 26.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.