Having debuted in India at the end of January this year, Suzuki Auto South Africa has released price and spec details of the mildly updated Baleno.
On sale locally since 2016 but out in its home market since 2015, the revisions include a sculpted front bumper, a restyled front grille with a central chrome strip, 3D headlights and on the flagship GLX, diamond-cut alloy wheels, LED headlights, chrome door handles and around the windows, rear tinted privacy glass and an integrated boot spoiler. Standard across the range are six colours with a new addition to the palette being Magma Red.

Inside, the changes are harder to spot with the Baleno gaining faux brushed aluminium detailing and deep blue cloth upholstery on the seats and door panels.
As before, the range is made up of two trim levels; GL and the aforementioned GLX with notable spec consisting out of electric windows all around, keyless entry, dual front airbags, ABS with EBD and BAS, a Bluetooth and USB enabled four-speaker sound system and electric mirrors.

Adding to this, the GLX receives automatic climate control, push-button start, a leather wrapped multi-function steering wheels and gear lever, rear parking sensors with a reverse camera, four additional airbags, cruise control, a 4.2-inch LCD instrument cluster display and a seven-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto.
The uptakes have however not filtered through to the powertrain where Suzuki has retained the normally aspirated 1.4-litre K14B petrol engine that produces 68kW/130Nm. Also carried over are the transmission choices, a five-speed manual on the GL and GLX with the latter offering the option of a four-speed automatic. Claimed fuel consumption is 5.1 L/100 km for the manual and 5.4 L/100 km for the auto.
A five year/200 000 km warranty and a four year/60 000 km service plan are standard across the range.
PRICING
Baleno 1.4 GL – R209 900
Baleno 1.4 GLX – R244 900
Baleno 1.4 GLX AT – R259 900
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.