With reports suggesting that the still-to-be-seen Land Cruiser 300 will go the hybrid route, a fresh claim from Australia has alleged that the next generation Toyota Hilux will receive an electrified powertrain when it allegedly debuts in 2023.
Part of Toyota’s push to have all of its models electrified by 2025, Toyota Australia Vice-President for Sales and Marketing, Sean Hanley, revealed to motoring.com.au that not only the Hilux but also the Land Cruiser 76 and 79 will come with a hybrid setup before said year.
“We’ve always maintained that whatever we do in the future, we will continue to have Hiluxes, we will continue to have Land Cruisers going forward, but we will bring out – in the future – some type of electrification. There’s no doubt. It’s certainly part of our future. We’re not sitting back here thinking the 70 Series won’t be part of our line-up in the future,” Hanley said.
While details surrounding the hybrid drivetrain are unknown, Hanley let slip that it could potentially consist out of a diesel/electric arrangement, a setup the automaker is also campaign for in the Land Cruiser 300 amidst reports that it will be available with a petrol/hybrid V6 setup.
Earlier this month, sales of the 4.6-litre V8 petrol powered Land Cruiser 200 ended Down Under after it was revealed that the 4.5 D-4D V8 motor accounted for nearly 100% of sales this year so far.
“For the big SUVs we are still committed to diesel… whatever we apply has got to be fit for purpose, it’s got to meet the requirements of the customer,” Toyota Australia Product Planning Head, Rod Ferguson, told whichcar.com.au last month.
According to Hanley, the push for a hybrid Hilux stems from rural and agricultural buyers who are “very enthusiastic for Toyota to bring out commercial vehicles in hybrid”.
“It’s incumbent on us to provide vehicles and mobility services of the future that suit their requirements and reduce any impact vehicles have on the earth. Whatever we bring out, we will have the capability required to fulfil their requirements,” he said.
The introduction of the hybrid could therefore result in Toyota opting not to introduce a V6 diesel engine that is rumoured to be heading for the next Hilux based on comments made last year by Toyota Argentina President Daniel Herrero, as the hybrid will likely to be paired to the existing 2.8 GD-6 motor also used in the Fortuner and Land Cruiser Prado.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.