The high levels of violence, inequality and poverty are leaving SA children at risk of becoming victims of sexual exploitation, according to findings of a paper on sexual exploitation of children. Launched by End Child Prostitution and Trafficking (ECPAT) International and the Youth Research Unit (YRU) of the Bureau of Market Research (BMR) yesterday, the paper claimed SA ranked 16 out of the 60 countries scored by the Out of the Shadows Index on the country’s response to child sexual exploitation and abuse. “SA’s position on the index’s ranking is explained by a strong legal framework to protect children from...The high levels of violence, inequality and poverty are leaving SA children at risk of becoming victims of sexual exploitation, according to findings of a paper on sexual exploitation of children.
Launched by End Child Prostitution and Trafficking (ECPAT) International and the Youth Research Unit (YRU) of the Bureau of Market Research (BMR) yesterday, the paper claimed SA ranked 16 out of the 60 countries scored by the Out of the Shadows Index on the country’s response to child sexual exploitation and abuse.
“SA’s position on the index’s ranking is explained by a strong legal framework to protect children from sexual exploitation and abuse, a committed technology sector and knowledgeable frontline of support workers.
“However, much needs to be done to ensure SA children live free from sexual exploitation and abuse,” the paper stated.
“For example, limited training and support for professionals working with child victims, as well as few opportunities for multi-sectoral collaborations, have been reportedly hampering efforts to tackle child sexual exploitation and abuse.”
Government had undertaken a number of positive preventive measures and awareness activities to address sexual exploitation of children, in particular through trafficking and online, the paper stated.
An example is the establishment of a cybercrime unit of the South African Police Service’s Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Investigations, formed to tackle cases such as crimes related to online child sexual exploitation.
The briefing paper also highlighted that violence continued to be widely experienced by South African children in communities, schools and in families.
“The data shows that high levels of sexual violence continue in South Africa.
“The message this sends must be counteracted by building positive and supportive environments in schools or violence will continue to pass from generation to generation,” said Mark Kavenagh, head of research and policy at ECPAT International.
The tribal custom of Ukuthwala, or bride kidnapping, was practised in some regions and was considered a risk factor for sexual exploitation. It has been noted by experts to increasingly involve kidnapping, rape and forced marriages.
Despite a 2015 draft Bill prohibiting forced and child marriages, as of October 2019 no legislative reform on this issue has occurred.
“South Africa ratified the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and therefore has committed to establishing the minimum age of marriage at 18 years old for both boys and girls with no exceptions,” said Andrea Varrella, legal research officer at ECPAT International.
The sexual exploitation of children is defined as when child is a victim of sexual exploitation when they take part in a sexual activity in exchange for something that either they or third parties receive.
Sexual violence in South Africa is high with the number of reported rapes increasing to 41,583 cases per year, compared to 40,035 in 2017-18 – a 3.9% increase.
Children accounted for 1,014 of murder victims and 18,586 of rape victims in the country.
– gcinan@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.