Turffontein Inside Saturday (05-10-19) Best Bet Race 7 No 4 Buffalo Bill Cody Buffalo Bill Cody left a few favourite backers disappointed when beaten 2.90 lengths into fifth by Sun Met winner Rainbow Bridge in the Grade 1 Champions Challenge. In his defence, that was his first run at top level, and he had never raced outside the Highveld before. Buffalo Bill Cody was on an impressive five-run winning streak prior, even outclassing the highly rated Cirillo by an extending 3.60 lengths in his penultimate effort. Most impressive is the fact he did so despite the disadvantage of returning from...Turffontein Inside Saturday (05-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 7 No 4 Buffalo Bill Cody
Buffalo Bill Cody left a few favourite backers disappointed when beaten 2.90 lengths into fifth by Sun Met winner Rainbow Bridge in the Grade 1 Champions Challenge.
In his defence, that was his first run at top level, and he had never raced outside the Highveld before.
Buffalo Bill Cody was on an impressive five-run winning streak prior, even outclassing the highly rated Cirillo by an extending 3.60 lengths in his penultimate effort. Most impressive is the fact he did so despite the disadvantage of returning from a layoff of more than seven months.
With that said, the 70-day layoff should not prove too much of a disadvantage today. Follow his career closely!
Bargain bet
Race 6 No 13 Gin Fizz
Mike de Kock-trained Gin Fizz kicked off career her career by registering a flawless 7.40-length triumph and has been holding her own against decent thoroughbreds ever since.
Considering she was returning from a five-month layoff in latest, the fact she was only beaten 0.40 lengths into second by Gaian Glory proves she is top-class. With benefit of fitness in her favour, she should improve way more than the margin she was beaten by on that occasion.
She also shoulders a mammoth 7.5kg less than main danger Vistula at 51kg and jumps from a decent No 6 draw as opposed to the latter’s wide No 11.
Durbanville Saturday (05-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 6 No 1 Front And Centre
Although Front And Centre failed to win a race during Champions Season, she was forced to jump from appalling draws in all three starts.
Despite this disadvantage, this ultra-consistent filly managed to finish second twice – showing her class. Considering this daughter of Dynasty runs off a high merit rating of 122 while the average of this contest is a low 106, she should have no trouble outclassing this sort of field.
She is unbeaten at this venue and will take a power of beating on these terms.
Bargain Bet
Race 7 No 2 One World
If Vaughan Marshall-trained One World One World was fully fit, he would possibly be tipped as the best bet on the card.
Unfortunately, he returns from a lengthy 133-day rest, is drawn a bit wide at No 7 and will have to lock horns with a hard-knocker in Undercover Agent, who beat Rainbow Bridge in the Grade 2 Drill Hall Stakes last season.
One World is one of the best thoroughbreds South Africa has to offer at the moment and his form proves this having won seven of nine starts. This Captain Al colt is also unbeaten over this course and distance, so he is hard to go against.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.