A new dawn – and this one will actually work. That is how Citroën views its return to the South African market, after a three-year absence. The marque will face a negative perception among South African car buyers, many of whom associate French cars with poor reliability, expensive parts, bad service and low resale values. The Citroën people are aware of the obstacles in their path and have a strategy to counter it. For one thing, they offer all their models with a comprehensive five-year/100 000km warranty, a 100 000km service plan and 24/7 roadside assistance, all of which is...A new dawn – and this one will actually work. That is how Citroën views its return to the South African market, after a three-year absence. The marque will face a negative perception among South African car buyers, many of whom associate French cars with poor reliability, expensive parts, bad service and low resale values.
The Citroën people are aware of the obstacles in their path and have a strategy to counter it. For one thing, they offer all their models with a comprehensive five-year/100 000km warranty, a 100 000km service plan and 24/7 roadside assistance, all of which is transferable if the car is sold.
Peugeot Citroën South Africa (PCSA) managing director Xavier Gobille, said: “When purchasing any new Citroën model, you are not just buying a Citroën. You are obtaining complete peace-of-mind motoring. The benefits of the five-year, 100 000km warranty and service plan will allow Citroën new car owners to plan their motoring budget accurately, with no hidden costs,” Gobille added.
Citroën’s peace-of-mind programme includes the use of courtesy cars, a comprehensive  Citroën parts basket, complimentary vehicle health checks and microdot technology for quick and easy identification in the event of car theft. Citroën vehicles can be serviced at any Peugeot-accredited dealership nationwide, with the current 25 branches set to grow by five before the end of the year. The car maker also offers a 24- hour customer care centre, an annual licence renewal reminder and warranty expiry notification.
“None of that would make sense if the products were not good,” said Clara Metivier-Beukes PCSA’s head of marketing. “But we know we have exciting, reliable and very uniquely French cars to offer – vehicles that are selling well in discerning markets like that of Germany, Spain and the UK”.
“That apart, we have done extensive research, and know what circumstances led to the South African car buyers’ negative perceptions of French cars. Thus, every employee of PCSA and its dealer network is totally focussed on improving every aspect of the business and putting the customer satisfaction first. In the process, we aim to build brand loyalty, and we have the products to back up our vision,” she added.
C5 Aircross

The flagship of Citroën’s new offensive on these shores will be the C5 Aircross SUV, which personifies the manufacturer’s marketing strategy of selling vehicles based on their unique French character. It boasts a unique and assertive personality and won’t be mistaken for any other car.
Sitting on 18-inch alloy wheels in 235/55R18 rubber, it is 4 500 mm long, 1 969 mm wide. and 1 689 mm high. It has a ground clearance of 230 mm, which along with lower door and wheel arch protectors, windscreen grille with halogen headlights, large wheels and roofbars gives it a cartoonish appearance that will appeal to millennials as being “funky”.
It comes powered by a four-cylinder, turbocharged, 1 598 cc petrol engine that produces 121 kW of power at 6 000 rpm and 240 Nm of torque at 1 400 rpm. An automatic six-speed gearbox transfers them to the front wheels. Comfort plays a large role in the vehicle’s offerings, starting with progressive hydraulic cushion suspension, where buffers at either end of the suspension setup all but eliminate bounce over rough terrain.

Adding to that is advanced soundproofing with reduced road and wind noise, thanks to double-glazed laminated front windows with an insulated layer, plus specific soundproofing of the engine compartment. Inside, there is space for five adults, with a variable boot size that starts at 520 litres and expands to 720 litres due to three individual sliding and reclining seats in the rear.
Citroën says their advanced comfort seats have an unrivalled ability to offer peerless ride comfort. A wide range of comfort features come as standard – refreshing, at a time when ticking additional feature boxes can quickly double the price of cars.
They include keyless start and entry, front and rear parking sensors, follow-me-home lights, a reverse camera, tinted rear windows, climate control, electric windows all round, a multi-function leather covered steering wheel, an eight-inch touchscreen with USB, Bluetooth, a 12V socket, sound system with six speakers, an on board computer, plus a mirror screen with Apple Carplay and Android Auto.

Safety features include disc brakes all round with ABS and EBD, traction control, hill-start assist, airbags for all occupants, Blind Spot Monitoring, an active lane-departure warning system, a driver attention alert, automatic hazard lights during sharp braking, automatic drive-away door locking and a tyre pressure monitoring system.
The gear changes are too smooth to be noticeable but it is not fast – Citroën claim it will go from standstill to 100km/h in 10.5 seconds with a top whack of 189 km/h. That does not matter – this car will sell on presence, quirkiness, comfort, practicality and uniqueness.
C3 Aircross

Like its bigger C5 brother, the C3 Aircross cannot be mistaken for any other vehicle. It boasts unique body styling, plus all the attributes of a robust and protective SUV, including raised ground clearance, a high-set driving position, large wheels and wing extenders.
It comes with the same three-cylinder, turbocharged, 1 199 cc engine as the C3 Shine model, also kicking out 81 kW of power at 5 500 rpm and 205 Nm of torque at 1 500 rpm – all sent to the front wheels via a six-speed automatic gearbox. Citroën says it will go to 100 km/h in 10.7 seconds, with a top speed of 184 km/h.
It is 4 154 mm long, 1 756 mm wide and 1 637 mm high, with 16- inch alloy wheels inside of 205/50/ R16 tyres. Citroën makes the point that this is a true SUV, with 178 mm of ground clearance, plus front and rear skid plates.

Setting it aside from other vehicles in the class, the C3 Aircross has unique styling touches, like colour on the roof bars and Venetian blind rear quarter lights. It has halogen headlamps, automatic headlamps, LED daytime running lights, rear lights in full LED 3D, front fog lights that swivel when cornering, welcome lights and a licence plate LED lamp. In its Shine persona it has red coloured side mirrors, chrome door handles, coloured rear quarter windows, and red roof bars.
Comfort and convenience features abound, like programmable cruise control with a speed limiter, keyless start and smart entry, front and rear centre armrests, one-touch electric window operation, plus an electrochromatic rear view mirror. There is also automatic air conditioning, a multi-function height and depth-adjustable steering wheel, plus automatic wipers with a rain sensor. It will seat five adults in cloth covered seats that will split and fold in a 60/40 configuration in the rear to increase the luggage space from 410-litres to 520-litres.
Safety features naturally include an ABS with EBD and emergency brake assist, traction control, hill-start assist, airbags all round, automatic drive-away locking, a tyre pressure sensor, a driver’s seatbelt unfastened warning and an anti-theft alarm system. There is a seven-inch touchscreen radio with USB, Bluetooth, a 12V socket and six speakers as well as a mirror screen with Apple Carplay and Android Auto, an on-board computer and on-board navigation system.

Most of my time at the launch was spent behind the wheel of the C3 Aircross and it impressed with its nimble handling and uncanny ability to soak up rough road conditions. Fast it is not, but Citroën’s targeted customers will not be looking for a race car, but unique styling and supreme comfort – both of which this vehicle supplies.
C3

When tackling an all-new market, one needs a solid entry-level model and Citroën believes they have exactly that in the latest C3 model. They say their versatile little hatchback offers an offbeat take on in-car living.
The entry-level Feel model is powered by a normally aspirated three-cylinder petrol engine of 1 199 cc that develops 60 kW of power at 5 750 rpm and 118 Nm of torque at 2 750 rpm. That goes to the front wheels via a five-speed manual gearbox. In the uprated Shine derivative, a turbocharger is added to raise the figures to 81 kW at 5 500 rpm and 205 Nm at 1 500 rpm, with a six-speed automatic gearbox.

The C3 is 3 996 mm long, 1 749 mm wide and 1 474 mm high, with all derivatives boasting five doors. The Feel sits on 16-inch alloy wheels in 205/55/R16 rubber, while the Shine has 17-inch alloys with 205/50/ R17 tyres. Both have a 15- inch steel spare wheel. Both offer halogen headlamps and LED daytime running lamps, while the Shine adds automatic headlamps, front fog lamps, welcome lights and follow me home lights to the list.

As could be expected a multitude of safety features come standard in both derivatives. Inside, Citroën says, the vehicle has a deliberately designed cocoon effect that filters out disturbances from the outside world Comfort items include electric power steering, programmable cruise control with a speed limiter, an automatic air conditioner, a leather-covered height and depth-adjustable steering wheel, electric front windows, cup holders, one touch front window operation, electric mirrors and cloth covered seats.
Citroën say the Feel will go from standstill to 100 km/h in 13.2 seconds, with a top whack of 169 km/h. Meanwhile, they reckon the Shine will dispatch 100 km/h in 9.4 sec, reaching a top speed of 194 km/h.
PRICING
C3
1.2 Feel – R239 900
1.2 THP Shine AT – R289 900
C3 Aircross
1.2 THP Feel AT – R339 900
1.2 THP Shine AT – R359 900
C5 Aircross
1.6 THP Feel AT – R469 900
1.6 THP Shine AT – R509 900
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.