The Head of BMW’s M division has spoken out on the switch towards electrification, as well as support for manual transmissions and chance of a full-blown front-wheel-drive M-car.
In a lengthy interview with caradvice.com.au at the M Festival held at Kyalami last week, Markus Flasch, after confirming both two-and-three-pedals for the 2021 M3 and M4, said that while a modern automatic ‘box holds significantly more advantages, demand from key markets such as the United States has resulted in the manual being kept.
“We’ve made a conscious decision (with M3 and M4) to continue (to offer manuals) and the market that pushed us very hard to do so was the United States. A manual isn’t faster on the racetrack. There are some advantages, such as weight, but in the overall package not really. (But) it’s something that adds character. And it’s something our customers love,” Flasch said.
With the ‘box set to feature on the so-called ‘Pure’ versions of the M3/M4 that will be rear-wheel-drive, Flasch stated that special as well as limited editions models will be created to meet demand, with some set to be offered with the Steptronic ‘box and the xDrive four-wheel-drive system, a setup that will allegedly be standard on the regular M and Competition models.
“This year we brought a brand new BMW M strategy through the BMW board. Part of this strategy is that we’ll increase our share in this high-performance and performance segment, and there will be more special models directly derived from customer-based cars, on a bigger scale in future,” he said, before describing the M brand’s heritage of manual models as being similar to that of Porsche.
“Typically, I don’t like to talk about brands but what really sets us apart is our heritage. And there’s probably only one company in the world with a similar thrilling heritage like we have and that’s Porsche. When you see what our community brings forward: the classic cars and the race cars, this is what sets M apart”.
In the same interview with the publication, Flasch officially ruled-out the possibility of their being a front-wheel-drive M-car, saying that a decision was made not to have the new front-wheel-drive 1 Series clash with the forthcoming 2 Series will retain a rear-wheel-drive layout.
“We have a very strong offering in the M2 so we figure there’s no need to have a high-performance car based on the 2 Series and then a performance car based on the (new) 1 Series”.
He also stated that buyers wanting to upgrade from the range-topping, four-wheel-drive M135i will have to opt for the M2 as “there is no reason to do something different with the 1 Series. (The M2) is the most charismatic and purest model that we have and we’re working on a successor”.
Speaking about the switch towards electrification he highlighted in June after replacing Frank van Meel, Flasch said that while the marque’s heavier models such as SUVs will feature a hybrid powertrain, “the models that will see electrification won’t be the pure, the core, the most distilled projects such the M2, 3 and 4”.
“I have very direct dialogue with customers… who are worried that we might dilute the power of those products today in order to be the first in new technology. I’m not producing cars for demonstrators, for people who don’t buy them. I’m producing cars for our customers and (they have) a very, very clear opinion of what they want to see,” he told the Aussie online platform.
“They will only buy the successor model if it’s better than the predecessor model, so if a new technology doesn’t qualify itself as better than its predecessor then it’s not going to happen. Our customers aren’t bragging about having the latest and the greatest but they know if they have an M badge on their car it’s the best car when it comes to performance. We need to keep up this promise”.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.