The drought escalation in the Kruger National Park is forcing its elephants into a growing number of escapes from the park as they hunt for food. This was confirmed yesterday by the park’s spokesperson, Ike Phaahla, who said that thanks to cooperation between the park and the Mpumalanga Tourism and Park Agency (MTPA) there had been no incidents. About six escapes had occurred in recent weeks, Phaahla said, of which three were in the north of the park, and “possibly” three in the Malelane Crocodile River area. “Once outside the park, the elephants become the MTPA’s problem,” said Phaahla. “On...The drought escalation in the Kruger National Park is forcing its elephants into a growing number of escapes from the park as they hunt for food.
This was confirmed yesterday by the park’s spokesperson, Ike Phaahla, who said that thanks to cooperation between the park and the Mpumalanga Tourism and Park Agency (MTPA) there had been no incidents.
About six escapes had occurred in recent weeks, Phaahla said, of which three were in the north of the park, and “possibly” three in the Malelane Crocodile River area.
“Once outside the park, the elephants become the MTPA’s problem,” said Phaahla. “On Thursday, four elephants managed to escape and we were able to provide a helicopter at the MTPA’s request to help herd them back inside Kruger’s boundaries.”
Phaahla said the Limpopo department of economic development, environment and tourism had also been helpful.
Unfortunately for one young bull, either hunger, musth, a loss of fear of humans or a combination of all three drove it into the Pretoriuskop staff village once too often last weekend.
“The elephant had apparently been chased away from the staff village a number of times and was threatening the lives of the staff,” Phaahla said.
A field ranger shot the threatening elephant immediately, after which it ran to outside the village where it died.
– amandaw@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.