Greyville Polytrack Wednesday (02-10-19) Best Bet Race 5 No 5 Gibraltar Green Everything that could go wrong in Gibraltar Green’s most recent performance went wrong! He didn’t have the best of starts, losing two lengths out the pens and turning for home he was denied a running room, which forced apprentice jockey Yuzae Ramzan – who retains the ride – to switch him for clear gap. Unfortunately, this tactic led to the rider dropping his reins late, taking away from the horse’s momentum – costing him the race. Gibraltar Green is smartly drawn at and advantageous No 3 today and...Greyville Polytrack Wednesday (02-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 5 No 5 Gibraltar Green
Everything that could go wrong in Gibraltar Green’s most recent performance went wrong!
He didn’t have the best of starts, losing two lengths out the pens and turning for home he was denied a running room, which forced apprentice jockey Yuzae Ramzan – who retains the ride – to switch him for clear gap.
Unfortunately, this tactic led to the rider dropping his reins late, taking away from the horse’s momentum – costing him the race.
Gibraltar Green is smartly drawn at and advantageous No 3 today and because Ramzan claims 4kg, his mount will carry a massive 4.5kg less than main danger Techno Captain at 53.5kg.
 
Bargain Bet
Race 3 No 12 Dispicable 
Not only did Dispicable justify favouritism on the first time of asking, he made an absolute mockery of his opposition – skipping an extending 3.20 lengths clear.
He returns to the scene of the crime today and although facing tougher opposition, he looks above-average and is worth a good Eachway bet.
Conditioner Tony Rivalland couldn’t help but sing the four-year-old’s praises following that victory and jockey Stuart Randolph went as far as saying this is one of the better horses he has sat on in a very long time!
On reputation alone he shouldn’t lose. All appears to be in his favour. He jumps from the best draw of all and carries 2kg less than main danger Coldhardcash.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.