Turffontein Inside track Saturday (12-10-19) Best Bet Race 6 No 5 Queen Supreme Jockey Callan Murray went on live television and admitted Queen Supreme was never supposed to lose her penultimate effort. He said he miss-judged the pace and that is essentially cost his mount the race. Murray more than made up for that blunder when steering Queen Supreme to a comfortable 2.25-length triumph over today’s course and distance most recently. The yard has never made secret of the fact they rate Queen Supreme highly and considering she’s been backed up to 6-10 favourite, she looks banker material in all...Turffontein Inside track Saturday (12-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 6 No 5 Queen Supreme
Jockey Callan Murray went on live television and admitted Queen Supreme was never supposed to lose her penultimate effort. He said he miss-judged the pace and that is essentially cost his mount the race.
Murray more than made up for that blunder when steering Queen Supreme to a comfortable 2.25-length triumph over today’s course and distance most recently. The yard has never made secret of the fact they rate Queen Supreme highly and considering she’s been backed up to 6-10 favourite, she looks banker material in all bets.
Bargain Bet
Race 7 No 1 Soqrat
Although Soqrat doesn’t have the most encouraging record when returning from layoffs, he is undeniably talented and if he didn’t race in the “Do It Again era” he would probably be dubbed the best miler in the country right now.
He is a three-time Grade 1 winner and finished close-up second behind Do It Again and Rainbow Bridge at Grade 1 level last season.
The hefty 62kg shouldn’t raise too many red flags, he is actually weighted to win. This is also a massive step down in class for this colt. He runs off a high merit rating of 131 while the average of this contest is 112.
Durbanville Saturday (12-10-19)
Best Bet
Race 7 No 6 Follow The Star
Although not disgraced in third, the manner in which Follow The Star ran on – on debut – over 1400m strongly suggested she was yearning for the extra ground.
She proved this to be true when justifying 21-10 favouritism by a commanding one-length over 1600m in her follow-up. To her advantage, she faces a bunch of rival who return from layoffs today and she is decently drawn at No 4.
Bargain Bet
Race 5 No 10 Bindi 
It is never easy to back a horse straight out the maidens, but if Bindi can reproduce anything close to her debut success, when making light work of opposition to win by an extending 1.75 lengths, she will be extremely hard to peg back. Her case is further strengthened by the fact that form line has produced a winner.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.